Stand in the fear of God and listen to the Holy Gospel. A reading from the Gospel according to our teacher Saint John the Evangelist, and the pure disciple. May his blessings be with us all.
قِفُوا بِخَوْفِ اللهِ، وَأَنْصِتُوا لِسَمَاعِ الإِنْجِيلِ الْمُقَدَّسِ. فَصْلٌ مِنْ بِشَارَةِ الإِنْجِيلِ لِمُعَلِّمِنَا مَارْ يوحنا الْبَشِيرِ، التِّلْمِيذِ الطَّاهِرِ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
From the Psalms of our teacher David the prophet. May his blessings be with us all.
مِنْ مَزَامِيرِ تَرَاتِيلِ مُعَلِّمِنَا دَاوُدَ النَّبِيِّ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
Matins Psalm
المزمور
	Psalms 50:7-8
(مزامير 50: 7-8)
Purge me with hyssop, and I shall be clean; Wash me, and I shall be whiter than snow. Make me hear joy and gladness, That the afflicted bones may rejoice.
Ⲉⲕⲉ̀ⲛⲟⲩϫϧ ⲉ̀ϫⲱⲓ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉⲕϣⲉⲛϩⲩⲥⲱⲡⲟⲛ ⲉⲓⲉ̀ⲧⲟⲩⲃⲟ: ⲉⲕⲉ̀ⲣⲁϧⲧ ⲉⲓⲉ̀ⲟⲩⲃⲁϣ ⲉ̀ϩⲟⲧⲉ ⲟⲩⲭⲓⲱⲛ. Ⲉⲕⲉ̀ⲑ̀ⲣⲓⲥⲱⲧⲉⲙ ⲉ̀ⲟⲩⲑⲉⲗⲏⲗ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲟⲩⲟⲩⲛⲟϥ: ⲉⲩⲉ̀ⲑⲉⲗⲏⲗ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲛⲓⲕⲁⲥ ⲉⲧⲑⲉⲃⲓⲏ̀ⲟⲩⲧ: ⲁ︦ⲗ︦.
تَنْضَحُ عَلَيَّ بزُوفَاكَ فَأَطْهُرُ، وَتَغسِلُنِي فَأَبْيَضُّ أَكْثَرَ مِنَ الثَّلْجِ. تُسْمِعُنِي سُرُورًا وَفَرَحًا، فَتَبْتَهِجُ الْعِظَامُ الْمُتَوَاضِعَةُ.
People:
Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
الليلويا.
	Psalm Trailer for the Pope or a Bishop
(Ⲙⲁⲣⲟⲩϭⲁⲥϥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲧ̀ⲉⲕⲕ̀ⲗⲏⲥⲓⲁ̀...)
People:
Amen Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲙⲏⲛ Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
امين الليلويا.
Then the introduction to the Gospel is read.
ثم تقال مقدمة الأنجيل وهي:
Reader:
Blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord. Our Lord, God, Savior and King of us all, Jesus Christ, Son of the living God to whom is glory forever. Amen.
القارﺉُ:
مباركٌ الآتي باسمِ الربِّ إلهِ القواتِ، ربُّنا وإلهُنا ومخلصُنا وملكُنا كلِّنا، يسوعُ المسيحُ، ابنُ اللهِ الحيِّ، الذي لهُ المجدُ إلى الأبدِ. آمين.
Matins Gospel
الإنجيل
	John 3:14-21
(يوحنا 3: 14-21)
14 And as Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, even so must the Son of Man be lifted up,
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲙ̀ⲫ̀ⲣⲏϯ ⲉⲧⲁ ⲙⲱⲩ̀ⲥⲏⲥ ϭⲉⲥ ⲡⲓϩⲟϥ ⲛ̀ϩ̀ⲣⲏⲓ ϩⲓ ⲡ̀ϣⲁϥⲉ ⲡⲁⲓⲣⲏϯ ϩⲱϯ ⲡⲉ ⲛ̀ⲧⲟⲩϭⲉⲥ ⲡ̀ϣⲏⲣⲓ ⲙ̀ⲫ̀ⲣⲱⲙⲓ.
14 " وَكَمَا رَفَعَ مُوسَى الْحَيَّةَ فِي البَرِّيَّةِ هكَذَا يَنْبَغِي أَنْ يُرْفَعَ ابْنُ الْإِنْسَانِ،
15 that whoever believes in Him should not perish but have eternal life.
Ϩⲓⲛⲁ ⲟⲩⲟⲛ ⲛⲓⲃⲉⲛ ⲉⲑⲛⲁϩϯ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟϥ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉϥϭⲓ ⲙ̀ⲡⲓⲱⲛϧ ⲛ̀ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ.
15 لَكِيْ يَنَالَ كُلُّ مَنْ يُؤْمِنُ بِهِ الْحَيَاةَ الْأَبَدِيَّةَ.
16 For God so loved the world that He gave His only begotten Son, that whoever believes in Him should not perish but have everlasting life.
Ⲡⲁⲓⲣⲏϯ ⲅⲁⲣ ⲁ ⲫϯ ⲙⲉⲛⲣⲉ ⲡⲓⲕⲟⲥⲙⲟⲥ ϩⲱⲥⲧⲉ ⲡⲉϥϣⲏⲣⲓ ⲙ̀ⲙⲁⲩⲁⲧϥ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉϥⲧⲏⲓϥ ϩⲓⲛⲁ ⲟⲩⲟⲛ ⲛⲓⲃⲉⲛ ⲉⲑⲛⲁϩϯ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟϥ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉϥϣ̀ⲧⲉⲙⲧⲁⲕⲟ ⲁⲗⲗⲁ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉϥϭⲓ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩⲱⲛϧ ⲛ̀ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ.
16 لِأَنَّهُ هكَذا أَحَبَّ اللَّهُ الْعَالَمَ حَتَّى بَذَلَ ابْنَهُ الْوَحِيدَ، لِكَيْ لَا يَهْلِكَ كُلُّ مَنْ يُؤْمِنُ بِهِ، بَلْ يَنَالُ الْحَيَاةَ الْأَبَدِيَّةَ.
17 For God did not send His Son into the world to condemn the world, but that the world through Him might be saved.
Ⲛⲉⲧⲁ ⲫϯ ⲅⲁⲣ ⲁⲛ ⲟⲩⲱⲣⲡ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉϥϣⲏ ⲣⲓ ⲉ̀ⲡⲓⲕⲟⲥⲙⲟⲥ ϩⲓⲛⲁ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉϥϯϩⲁⲡ ⲉ̀ⲡⲓⲕⲟⲥⲙⲟⲥ ⲁⲗⲗⲁ ϩⲓⲛⲁ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲡⲓⲕⲟⲥⲙⲟⲥ ⲛⲟϩⲉⲙ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ϩⲓⲧⲟⲧϥ.
17 لِأَنَّهُ لَمْ يُرْسِلِ اللَّهُ ابْنَهُ إِلَى الْعَالَمِ لِيَدِينَ الْعَالَمَ، بَلْ لِيَخْلُصَ بِهِ الْعَالَمُ.
18 “He who believes in Him is not condemned; but he who does not believe is condemned already, because he has not believed in the name of the only begotten Son of God.
Ⲫⲏⲉⲑⲛⲁϩϯ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟϥ ⲥⲉⲛⲁϯϩⲁⲡ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟϥ ⲁⲛ ⲫⲏ ⲇⲉ ⲉⲧⲉⲛ̀ϥ̀ⲛⲁϩϯ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟϥ ⲁⲛ ϩⲏⲇⲏ ⲁⲩⲟⲩⲱ ⲉⲩϯϩⲁⲡ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟϥ ϫⲉ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉϥⲛⲁϩϯ ⲉ̀ⲫ̀ⲣⲁⲛ ⲙ̀ⲡⲓⲙⲟⲛⲟⲅⲉⲛⲏⲥ ⲛ̀ϣⲏⲣⲓ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲫϯ.
18 مَنْ يُؤْمِنُ بِهِ لَا يُدَانُ، وَمَنْ لَا يُؤْمِنُ بِهِ فَقَدْ دِينَ، لِأَنَّهُ لَمْ يُؤْمِنْ بِاسْمِ ابْنِ اللَّهِ الْوَحِيدِ.
19 And this is the condemnation, that the light has come into the world, and men loved darkness rather than light, because their deeds were evil.
Ⲫⲁⲓ ⲡⲉ ⲡⲓϩⲁⲡ ϫⲉ ⲡⲓⲟⲩⲱⲓⲛⲓ ⲁϥⲒ̀ ⲉ̀ⲡⲓⲕⲟⲥⲙⲟⲥ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛⲓⲣⲱⲙⲓ ⲁⲩⲙⲉⲛⲣⲉ ⲡⲓⲭⲁⲕⲓ ⲙⲁⲗⲗⲟⲛ ⲉ̀ϩⲟⲧⲉ ⲡⲓⲟⲩⲱⲓⲛⲓ ⲛⲟⲩϩⲃⲏⲟⲩⲓ̀ ⲅⲁⲣ ⲛⲁⲩϩⲱⲟⲩ ⲡⲉ.
19 وَهَذِهِ الدَّيْنُونَةُ هيَ: إِنَّ النُّورَ قَدْ جَاءَ إِلَى الْعَالَمِ، وَأَحَبَّ النَّاسُ الظُّلْمَةَ أَكْثَرَ مِنَ النُّورِ، لِأَنَّ أَعْمَالَهُمْ كَانَتْ شِرِّيرَةً.
20 For everyone practicing evil hates the light and does not come to the light, lest his deeds should be exposed.
Ⲟⲩⲟⲛ ⲅⲁⲣ ⲛⲓⲃⲉⲛ ⲉⲧⲓ̀ⲣⲓ ⲙ̀ⲡⲓⲡⲉⲧϩⲱⲟⲩ ϥ̀ⲙⲟⲥϯ ⲙ̀ⲡⲓⲟⲩⲱⲓⲛⲓ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲙ̀ⲡⲁϥⲓ̀ ϩⲁ ⲡⲓⲟⲩⲱⲓⲛⲓ ϩⲓⲛⲁ ⲛ̀ⲧⲟⲩϣ̀ⲧⲉⲙⲥⲟϩⲓ ⲛ̀ⲛⲉϥϩ̀ⲃⲏⲟⲩⲒ̀ ϫⲉ ⲥⲉϩⲱⲟⲩ.
20 لِأَنَّ كُلَّ مَنْ يَعْمَلُ الشَّرَّ يُبْغِضُ النُّورَ، وَلَا يَأْتِي إِلَى النُّورِ، لِئَلَّا تُوَبَّخَ أَعْمَالُهُ لِأَنَّهَا شِرِّيرَةٌ.
21 But he who does the truth comes to the light, that his deeds may be clearly seen, that they have been done in God.”
Ⲫⲏ ⲇⲉ ⲉⲧⲓ̀ⲣⲓ ⲛ̀ϯⲙⲉⲑⲙⲏⲓ ϣⲁϥⲓ̀ ϩⲁ ⲡⲓⲟⲩⲱⲓⲛⲓ ϩⲓⲛⲁ ⲛ̀ⲧⲟⲩⲟⲩⲱⲛϩ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲛⲉϥϩ̀ⲃⲏⲟⲩⲓ̀ ϫⲉ ⲉⲧⲁϥⲁⲓⲧⲟⲩ ϧⲉⲛ ⲫϯ.
21 وَأَمَّا مَنْ يَعْمَلُ الْحَقَّ فَيُقْبِلُ إِلَى النُّورِ، لِكَيْ تَظْهَرَ أَعْمَالُهُ أَنَّهَا بِاللَّهِ مَعْمُولَةٌ ".