Prophecies
النبوآت
	Proverbs 11:13-26
(أمثال 11: 13-26)
A reading from the Proverbs of Solomon the prophet. May his holy blessings be with us. Amen.
Ⲉⲃⲟⲗϧⲉⲛ ⲛⲓⲡⲁⲣⲟⲓⲙⲓⲁ̀ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ Ⲥⲟⲗⲟⲙⲱⲛ ⲡⲓⲡ̀ⲣⲟⲫⲏⲧⲏⲥ: ⲉ̀ⲣⲉⲡⲉϥⲥ̀ⲙⲟⲩ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ ϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲛⲉⲙⲁⲛ ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ ⲉϥϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ:
من أمثال سليمان النبي بركته المقدسة تكون معنا. آمين.
13 A talebearer reveals secrets, But he who is of a faithful spirit conceals a matter.
13 السَّاعِي بِالنَّمِيمَةِ يُفْشِي السِّرَّ، وَالْأَمِينُ الرُّوحِ يَكْتُمُ الْأَمْرَ.
14 Where there is no counsel, the people fall; But in the multitude of counselors there is safety.
14 بِعَدَمِ التَّدْبِيرِ يَسْقُطُ الشَّعْبُ، أَمَّا الْخَلَاصُ فَبِكَثْرَةِ الْمُشِيرِينَ.
15 He who is surety for a stranger will suffer, But one who hates being surety is secure.
15 ضَرَرًا يُضَرُّ مَنْ يَضْمَنُ غَرِيبًا، وَمَنْ كَرِهَ الصَّافِقِينَ اِطْمَأَنَّ.
16 A gracious woman retains honor, But ruthless men retain riches.
16 الْمَرْأَةُ ذَاتُ النِّعْمَةِ تَحْصُلُ عَلَى الْكَرَامَةِ، وَذَوُو الْقُوَّةِ يَحْصُلُونَ عَلَى الْغِنَى.
17 The merciful man does good for his own soul, But he who is cruel troubles his own flesh.
17 الرَّجُلُ الرَّحِيمُ يُحْسِنُ إِلَى نَفْسِهِ، وَذُو الْقَسَاوَةِ يُسِيءُ إِلَى جَسَدِهِ.
18 The wicked man does deceptive work, But he who sows righteousness will have a sure reward.
18 الْمُنَافِقُ يَصْنَعُ عَمَلًا يَخُونُهُ، وَزَارِعُ الْبِرِّ لَهُ ثَوَابٌ أَمِينٌ.
19 As righteousness leads to life, So he who pursues evil pursues it to his own death.
19 كَمَا أَنَّ الْبِرَّ يَؤُولُ إِلَى الْحَيَاةِ كَذَلِكَ مَنْ يَتْبَعُ الشَّرَّ فَإِلَى مَوْتِهِ.
20 Those who are of a perverse heart are an abomination to the Lord, But the blameless in their ways are His delight.
20 كَرَاهَةُ الرَّبِّ مُلْتَوُو الْقَلْبِ، وَرِضَاهُ مُسْتَقِيمُو الطَّرِيقِ.
21 Though they join forces, the wicked will not go unpunished; But the posterity of the righteous will be delivered.
21 مَنْ يُلْقِي يَدًا عَلَى يَدٍ ظُلْمًا، لَا يَفْلِتُ مِنَ الْعِقَابِ. وَمَنْ يَزْرَعُ عَدْلًا يَأْخُذُ أَجْرًا صَالِحًا.
22 As a ring of gold in a swine’s snout, So is a lovely woman who lacks discretion.
22 خِزَامَةُ ذَهَبٍ فِي أَنْفِ خِنْزِيرَةٍ الْمَرْأَةُ الْجَمِيلَةُ الْعَدِيمَةُ الْعَقْلِ.
23 The desire of the righteous is only good, But the expectation of the wicked is wrath.
23 كُلُّ شَهَوَاتِ الْأَبْرَارِ صَالِحَةٌ هِيَ، أَمَّا رَجَاءُ الْمُنَافِقِينَ فَهُوَ هَلَاكٌ.
24 There is one who scatters, yet increases more; And there is one who withholds more than is right, But it leads to poverty.
24 رُبَّ مُبَدِّدٍ يَزْدَادُ أَكْثَرَ، وَمُمْسِكٌ فَوْقَ الاِقْتِصَادِ لَا تَكُونُ عَاقِبَتُهُ إِلَّا الْفَاقَةُ.
25 The generous soul will be made rich, And he who waters will also be watered himself.
25 النَّفْسُ الَّتِي تُبَارِكُ تُسَمَّنُ، وَالْمُرْوِي هُوَ أَيْضًا يُرْوَى.
26 The people will curse him who withholds grain, But blessing will be on the head of him who sells it.
26 الَّذِي يَحْتَكِرُ الْحِنْطَةَ يَلْعَنُهُ الشَّعْبُ، وَالْبَرَكَةُ عَلَى رَأْسِ الْبَائِعِ.
Glory be to the Holy Trinity, our God, forever and unto the ages of all ages. Amen.
Ⲟⲩⲱ̀ⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ϯⲧ̀ⲣⲓⲁⲥ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ Ⲡⲉⲛⲛⲟⲩϯ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛⲉⲙ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲛⲓⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲧⲏⲣⲟⲩ: ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ.
مجداً للثالوث القدوس إلهنا الى أبد الآبدين كلها آمين.
	Isaiah 65:8-16
(اشعياء 65: 8-16)
A reading from Isaiah, the prophet. May his holy blessings be with us. Amen.
Ⲉⲃⲟⲗϧⲉⲛ Ⲏⲥⲁⲏ̀ⲁⲥ ⲡⲓⲡ̀ⲣⲟⲫⲏⲧⲏⲥ: ⲉ̀ⲣⲉⲡⲉϥⲥ̀ⲙⲟⲩ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ ϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲛⲉⲙⲁⲛ ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ ⲉϥϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ:
من اشعياء النبي بركته المقدسة تكون معنا. آمين.
8 Thus says the Lord: “As the new wine is found in the cluster, And one says, ‘Do not destroy it, For a blessing is in it,’ So will I do for My servants’ sake, That I may not destroy them all.
8 هَكَذَا قَالَ الرَّبُّ: كَمَا يُوجَدُ النَّبِيذُ فِي عُنْقُودٍ، فَيَقُولُ قَائِلٌ: لَا تُتْلِفْهُ فَإِنَّ فِيهِ بَرَكَةً. كَذَلِكَ أَصْنَعُ لِأَجْلِ عَبِيدِي لِئَلَّا أُتْلِفَ الْجَمِيعَ.
9 I will bring forth descendants from Jacob, And from Judah an heir of My mountains; My elect shall inherit it, And My servants shall dwell there.
9 وَسَأُخْرِجُ مِنْ يَعْقُوبَ نَسْلًا وَمِنْ يَهُوذَا وَارِثًا لِجِبَالِي، فَيَرِثُهَا مُخْتَارِيَّ، وَعَبِيدِي يَسْكُنُونَ هُنَاكَ.
10 Sharon shall be a fold of flocks, And the Valley of Achor a place for herds to lie down, For My people who have sought Me.
10 وَيَكُونُ الشَّارُونُ مَأْوَى غَنَمٍ، وَوَادِي عَكُورَ مَرْبِضَ بَقَرٍ، لِشَعْبِي الَّذِينَ الْتَمَسُونِي.
11 “But you are those who forsake the Lord, Who forget My holy mountain, Who prepare a table for Gad, And who furnish a drink offering for Meni.
11 وَأَنْتُمُ الَّذِينَ تَرَكُوا الرَّبَّ وَنَسُوا جَبَلَ قُدْسِي، الَّذِينَ يُهَيِّئُونَ الْمَائِدَةَ لِجَدَّ، وَيُعِدُّونَ الْمَمْزُوجَ لِمَنَاةَ،
12 Therefore I will number you for the sword, And you shall all bow down to the slaughter; Because, when I called, you did not answer; When I spoke, you did not hear, But did evil before My eyes, And chose that in which I do not delight.”
12 فَإِنِّي أُعَيِّنُكُمْ لِلسَّيْفِ، وَتَجْثُونَ جَمِيعُكُمْ لِلذَّبْحِ، لِأَنِّي دَعَوْتُ وَلَمْ تُجِيبُوا، تَكَلَّمْتُ وَلَمْ تَسْمَعُوا، بَلْ صَنَعْتُمُ الشَّرَّ فِي عَيْنَيَّ، وَاخْتَرْتُمْ مَا لَمْ أُسَرَّ بِهِ.
13 Therefore thus says the Lord God: “Behold, My servants shall eat, But you shall be hungry; Behold, My servants shall drink, But you shall be thirsty; Behold, My servants shall rejoice, But you shall be ashamed;
13 لِذَلِكَ هَكَذَا قَالَ السَّيِّدُ الرَّبُّ: هُوَذَا عَبِيدِي يَأْكُلُونَ وَأَنْتُمْ تَجُوعُونَ. هُوَذَا عَبِيدِي يَشْرَبُونَ وَأَنْتُمْ تَعْطَشُونَ. هُوَذَا عَبِيدِي يَفْرَحُونَ وَأَنْتُمْ تَحْزَنُونَ،
14 Behold, My servants shall sing for joy of heart, But you shall cry for sorrow of heart, And wail for grief of spirit.
14 هُوَذَا عَبِيدِي يَتَرَنَّمُونَ مِنْ طِيبِ الْقَلْبِ وَأَنْتُمْ تَصْرُخُونَ مِنْ كَآبَةِ الْقَلْبِ، وَمِنِ انْكِسَارِ الرُّوحِ تُوَلْوِلُونَ.
15 You shall leave your name as a curse to My chosen; For the Lord God will slay you, And call His servants by another name;
15 وَتُخَلِّفُونَ اسْمَكُمْ لَعْنَةً لِمُخْتَارِيَّ. وَيَقْتُلُكَ السَّيِّدُ الرَّبُّ وَيَدْعُو عَبِيدَهُ بِاسْمِ آخَرَ.
16 So that he who blesses himself in the earth Shall bless himself in the God of truth.
16 فَالَّذِي يَتَبَارَكُ عَلَى الْأَرْضِ يَتَبَارَكُ بِإِلَهِ الْحَقِّ.
Glory be to the Holy Trinity, our God, forever and unto the ages of all ages. Amen.
Ⲟⲩⲱ̀ⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ϯⲧ̀ⲣⲓⲁⲥ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ Ⲡⲉⲛⲛⲟⲩϯ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛⲉⲙ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲛⲓⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲧⲏⲣⲟⲩ: ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ.
مجداً للثالوث القدوس إلهنا الى أبد الآبدين كلها آمين.
	Job 42:1-6
(ايوب 42: 1-6)
A reading from Job the righteous. May his holy blessings be with us. Amen.
Ⲉⲃⲟⲗϧⲉⲛ Ⲓⲱⲃ Ⲡⲓⲑ̀ⲙⲏⲓ: ⲉ̀ⲣⲉⲡⲉϥⲥ̀ⲙⲟⲩ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ ϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲛⲉⲙⲁⲛ ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ ⲉϥϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ:
من ايوب الصديق بركته المقدسة تكون معنا. آمين.
1 Then Job answered the Lord and said:
1 فَأَجَابَ أَيُّوبُ الرَّبَّ وَقَالَ:
2 “I know that You can do everything, And that no purpose of Yours can be withheld from You.
2 " قَدْ عَلِمْتُ أَنَّكَ قَادِرٌ عَلَى كُلِّ أَمْرٍ، فَلَا يَتَعَذَّرُ عَلَيْكَ مُرَادٌ.
3 You asked, ‘Who is this who hides counsel without knowledge?’ Therefore I have uttered what I did not understand, Things too wonderful for me, which I did not know.
3 مَنْ ذَا الَّذِي يَلْبَسُ الْمَشُورَةَ فِي غَيْرِ عِلْمٍ؟ إِنِّي قَدْ نَطَقْتُ بِمَا لَا أُدْرِكُ، بِمُعْجِزَاتٍ تَفُوقُنِي وَلَا أَعْلَمُهَا.
4 Listen, please, and let me speak; You said, ‘I will question you, and you shall answer Me.’
4 اِسْمَعْ فَأَتَكَلَّمَ. أَسْأَلُكَ فَأَخْبِرْنِي.
5 “I have heard of You by the hearing of the ear, But now my eye sees You.
5 كُنْتُ قَدْ سَمِعْتُكَ سَمْعَ الْأُذُنِ، أَمَّا الْآنَ فَعَيْنِي قَدْ رَأَتْكَ.
6 Therefore I abhor myself, And repent in dust and ashes.”
6 فَلِذَلِكَ أُنْكِرُ مَقَالَتِي. وَأَنْدَمُ فِي التُّرَابِ وَالرَّمَادِ.
Glory be to the Holy Trinity, our God, forever and unto the ages of all ages. Amen.
Ⲟⲩⲱ̀ⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ϯⲧ̀ⲣⲓⲁⲥ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ Ⲡⲉⲛⲛⲟⲩϯ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛⲉⲙ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲛⲓⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲧⲏⲣⲟⲩ: ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ.
مجداً للثالوث القدوس إلهنا الى أبد الآبدين كلها آمين.