Stand in the fear of God and listen to the Holy Gospel. A reading from the Gospel according to our teacher Saint Matthew the Evangelist, and the pure disciple. May his blessings be with us all.
قِفُوا بِخَوْفِ اللهِ، وَأَنْصِتُوا لِسَمَاعِ الإِنْجِيلِ الْمُقَدَّسِ. فَصْلٌ مِنْ بِشَارَةِ الإِنْجِيلِ لِمُعَلِّمِنَا مَارْ متى الْبَشِيرِ، التِّلْمِيذِ الطَّاهِرِ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
From the Psalms of our teacher David the prophet. May his blessings be with us all.
مِنْ مَزَامِيرِ تَرَاتِيلِ مُعَلِّمِنَا دَاوُدَ النَّبِيِّ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
Matins Psalm
المزمور
	Psalms 62:1
(مزامير 62: 1)
O God, You are my God; Early will I seek You; My soul thirsts for You; My flesh longs for You In a dry and thirsty land Where there is no water.
ⲪϮ ⲡⲁⲛⲟⲩϯ ⲁⲓⲛⲁϣⲟⲣⲡⲧ ϩⲁⲣⲟⲕ: ϫⲉ ⲁⲥⲓⲃⲓ ⲛ̀ϧⲏⲧⲕ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲧⲁⲯⲩⲭⲏ: ⲉⲑⲣⲉⲥⲫⲓⲣⲓ ⲛⲁⲕ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲧⲁⲥⲁⲣⲝ ϧⲉⲛ ⲟⲩⲕⲁϩⲓ ⲛ̀ϣⲁϥⲉ: ⲛⲉⲙ ⲟⲩⲙⲁ ⲛ̀ⲑⲙⲟϣⲓ ϩⲓⲱⲧϥ: ⲁ︦ⲗ︦.
يَا أَللَّهُ إِلَهِي إِلَيْكَ أُبَكِّرُ؛ لِأَنَّ نَفْسِي عَطِشَتْ إِلَيْكَ، لِكَيْ يُزْهِرَ لَكَ جَسَدِي فِي أَرْضٍ مُقْفِرَةٍ، وَمَوْضِعٍ غَيْرِ مَسْلُوكٍ.
People:
Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
الليلويا.
	Psalm Trailer for the Pope or a Bishop
(Ⲙⲁⲣⲟⲩϭⲁⲥϥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲧ̀ⲉⲕⲕ̀ⲗⲏⲥⲓⲁ̀...)
People:
Amen Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲙⲏⲛ Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
امين الليلويا.
Then the introduction to the Gospel is read.
ثم تقال مقدمة الأنجيل وهي:
Reader:
Blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord. Our Lord, God, Savior and King of us all, Jesus Christ, Son of the living God to whom is glory forever. Amen.
القارﺉُ:
مباركٌ الآتي باسمِ الربِّ إلهِ القواتِ، ربُّنا وإلهُنا ومخلصُنا وملكُنا كلِّنا، يسوعُ المسيحُ، ابنُ اللهِ الحيِّ، الذي لهُ المجدُ إلى الأبدِ. آمين.
Matins Gospel
الإنجيل
	Matthew 20:20-28
(متى 20: 20-28)
20 Then the mother of Zebedee’s sons came to Him with her sons, kneeling down and asking something from Him.
Ⲧⲟⲧⲉ ⲁⲥⲓ̀ ϩⲁⲣⲟϥ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲑ̀ⲙⲁⲩ ⲛ̀ⲛⲉⲛϣⲏⲣⲓ ⲛ̀Ⲍⲉⲃⲉⲇⲉⲟⲥ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲛⲉⲥϣⲏⲣⲓ ⲉⲥⲟⲩⲱϣⲧ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟϥ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉⲥⲉⲣⲉ̀ⲧⲓⲛ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟϥ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩϩⲱⲃ.
20 حِينَئِذٍ جَاءَتْ إِلَيهِ أُمُّ ابْنَيْ زَبْدِي مَعَ ابْنَيْهَا، وَسَجَدَتْ لَهُ وَسَأَلَتْهُ شَيْئًا.
21 And He said to her, “What do you wish?” She said to Him, “Grant that these two sons of mine may sit, one on Your right hand and the other on the left, in Your kingdom.”
Ⲛ̀ⲑⲟϥ ⲇⲉ ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ⲛⲁⲥ ϫⲉ ⲟⲩ ⲡⲉ ⲉ̀ⲧⲉⲟⲩⲁϣϥ ⲡⲉϫⲁⲥ ⲛⲁϥ ϫⲉ ⲁ̀ϫⲟⲥ ϩⲓⲛⲁ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲡⲁϣⲏⲣⲓ ⲃ︦ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲟⲩⲁⲓ ⲙ̀ⲙⲱⲟⲩ ϩⲉⲙⲥⲓ ⲥⲁ ⲧⲉⲕⲟⲩⲓ̀ⲛⲁⲙ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲟⲩⲁⲓ ⲥⲁ ⲧⲉⲕϫⲁϭⲏ ⲛ̀ϩ̀ⲣⲏⲓ ϧⲉⲛ ⲧⲉⲕⲙⲉⲧⲟⲩⲣⲟ.
21 أَمَّا هُوَ فَقَالَ لَهَا: " مَاذَا تُرِيدِينَ؟ " قَالَتْ لَهُ: " قُلْ أَنْ يَجْلِسَ ابْنَايَ الاثْنَانِ، أَحَدُهُمَا عَنْ يَمِينِكَ وَالْآخَرُ عَنْ يَسَارِكَ فِي مَلَكُوتِكَ "
22 But Jesus answered and said, “You do not know what you ask. Are you able to drink the cup that I am about to drink, and be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with?” They said to Him, “We are able.”
Ⲁϥⲉ̀ⲣⲟⲩⲱ̀ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ Ⲓⲏ︦ⲥ︦ ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ϫⲉ ⲧⲉⲧⲉⲛⲉ̀ⲙⲓ ⲁⲛ ϫⲉ ⲁ̀ⲣⲉⲧⲉ̀ⲛⲉⲣⲉ̀ⲧⲓⲛ ⲉⲑⲃⲉ ⲟⲩ ⲟⲩⲟⲛϣ̀ϫⲟⲙ ⲙ̀ⲙⲱⲧⲉⲛ ⲉ̀ⲥⲉ ⲡⲓⲁ̀ⲫⲟⲧ ⲉ̀ϯⲛⲁⲥⲟϥ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲡⲓⲱⲙⲥ ⲉ̀ϯⲛⲁⲱⲙⲥ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟϥ ⲉ̀ⲣⲉⲧⲉ̀ⲛⲉⲙⲥ ⲑⲏⲛⲟⲩ ⲡⲉϫⲱⲟⲩ ⲛⲁϥ ϫⲉ ⲟⲩⲟⲛϣ̀ϫⲟⲙ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲛ.
22 فَأَجَابَ يَسُوعُ وَقَالَ: " إِنَّكُمَا لَسْتُمَا تَعْلَمَانِ مَا تَطْلُبَانِ. أَتَقْدِرَانِ أَنْ تَشْرَبَا الْكَأْسَ الَّتِي أَنَا مُزْمِعٌ أَنْ أَشْرَبَهَا، وَبِالصِّبْغَةِ الَّتِي سَأَصْطَبِغُ بِهَا تَصْطَبِغَانِ؟ " فَقَالَا لَهُ: " نَقْدِرُ ".
23 So He said to them, “You will indeed drink My cup, and be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with; but to sit on My right hand and on My left is not Mine to give, but it is for those for whom it is prepared by My Father.”
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ⲛⲱⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ Ⲓⲏ︦ⲥ︦ ϫⲉ ⲡⲓⲁ̀ⲫⲟⲧ ⲙⲉⲛ ⲉ̀ⲣⲉⲧⲉⲛⲉ̀ⲥⲟϥ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲡⲓⲱⲙⲥ ⲧⲉⲧⲉⲛⲛⲁⲱⲙⲥ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟϥ ⲉ̀ϩⲉⲙⲥⲓ ⲇⲉ ⲥⲁⲧⲁⲟⲩⲓ̀ⲛⲁⲙ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲧⲁϫⲁϭⲏ ⲫⲱⲓ ⲁⲛ ⲡⲉ ⲉ̀ⲧⲏⲓϥ ⲁⲗⲗⲁ ⲫⲁ ⲛⲏ ⲡⲉ ⲉ̀ⲧⲁ ⲡⲁⲓⲱⲧ ⲉⲧϧⲉⲛ ⲛⲓⲫⲏⲟⲩⲓ̀ ⲥⲉⲃⲧⲱⲧϥ ⲛⲱⲟⲩ.
23 فَقَالَ لَهُمَا يَسُوعُ: " أَمَّا الْكَأْسُ فَتَشْرَبَانِها، وَبِالصِّبْغَةِ الَّتِي أَصْطَبِغُ بِهَا أَنَا تَصْطَبِغَانِ. وَأَمَّا الْجُلُوسُ عَنْ يَمِينِي وَعَنْ يَسَارِي فَلَيْسَ لِي أَنْ أُعْطِيَهُ إلَّا لِلَّذِينَ أُعِدَّ لَهُمْ مِنْ قِبَلِ أَبِيَ الَّذِي فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ ".
24 And when the ten heard it, they were greatly displeased with the two brothers.
Ⲉ̀ⲧⲁⲩⲥⲱⲧⲉⲙ ⲇⲉ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲡⲓⲕⲉ ⲓ︦ ⲙ̀ⲙⲁⲑⲏⲧⲏⲥ ⲁⲩⲭ̀ⲣⲉⲙⲣⲉⲙ ⲉⲑⲃⲉ ⲡⲓⲥⲟⲛ ⲃ︦.
24 فَلَمَّا سَمِعَ التَّلَامِيذُ الْعَشَرَةُ تَقَمْقَمُوا مِنْ أَجْلِ الْأَخَوَيْنِ.
25 But Jesus called them to Himself and said, “You know that the rulers of the Gentiles lord it over them, and those who are great exercise authority over them.
Ⲓⲏ︦ⲥ︦ ⲇⲉ ⲁϥⲙⲟⲩϯ ⲉ̀ⲣⲱⲟⲩ ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ⲛⲱⲟⲩ ϫⲉ ⲧⲉⲧⲉⲛⲉ̀ⲙⲓ ϫⲉ ⲛⲓⲁⲣⲭⲱⲛ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲛⲓⲉⲑⲛⲟⲥ ⲉⲧⲟⲓ ⲛ̀ⲟ︦ⲥ︦ ⲉ̀ⲣⲱⲟⲩ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛⲟⲩⲕⲉⲛⲓϣϯ ⲉⲧⲟⲓ ⲛ̀ⲉⲣϣⲓϣⲓ ⲉ̀ϫⲱⲟⲩ.
25 فَدَعَاهُمْ يَسُوعُ وَقَالَ لَهُمْ: " أَمَا عَلِمْتُمْ أَنَّ رُؤسَاءَ الأُمَمِ يَسُودُونَهَا، وَعُظَمَاءَهَا يَتَسَلَّطُونَ عَلَيْهَا.
26 Yet it shall not be so among you; but whoever desires to become great among you, let him be your servant.
Ⲡⲁⲓⲣⲏϯ ⲇⲉ ⲁⲛ ⲡⲉⲑⲛⲁϣⲱⲡⲓ ϧⲉⲛ ⲑⲏⲛⲟⲩ ⲁⲗⲗⲁ ⲫⲏⲑⲟⲩⲱϣ ⲉ̀ⲉⲣ ⲛⲓϣϯ ϧⲉⲛ ⲑⲏⲛⲟⲩ ⲉϥⲉ̀ⲉⲣ ⲇⲓⲁⲕⲱⲛ ⲛⲱⲧⲉⲛ.
26 وَأَمَّا أَنْتُمْ فَلَا يَكُنْ فِيكُمْ هَكَذَا. وَلَكِنْ مَنْ أَرَادَ أَنْ يَكُونَ فِيكُمْ عَظِيمًا فَلْيَكُنْ لَكُمْ خَادِمًا،
27 And whoever desires to be first among you, let him be your slave—
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲫⲏⲉⲑⲟⲩⲱϣ ⲉ̀ⲉⲣ ϩⲟⲩⲓⲧ ϧⲉⲛ ⲑⲏⲛⲟⲩ ⲉϥⲉ̀ⲉⲣ ⲃⲱⲕ ⲛⲱⲧⲉⲛ.
27 وَمَنْ يُرِيدُ أَنْ يَكُونَ فِيكُمْ أَوَّلًا فَلْيَكُنْ لَكُمْ عَبْدًا،
28 just as the Son of Man did not come to be served, but to serve, and to give His life a ransom for many.”
Ⲙ̀ⲫ̀ⲣⲏϯ ϩⲱϥ ⲙ̀Ⲡ̀ϣⲏⲣⲓ ⲙ̀Ⲫ̀ⲣⲱⲙⲓ ⲛⲉⲧⲁϥⲓ̀ ⲁⲛ ⲉⲑⲣⲟⲩϣⲉⲙϣⲏⲧϥ ⲁⲗⲗⲁ ⲉ̀ϣⲉⲙϣⲓ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉ̀ϯ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉϥⲯⲩⲭⲏ ⲛ̀ⲥⲱϯ ⲉ̀ϫⲉⲛ ⲟⲩⲙⲏϣ.
28 كَمَا أَنَّ ابْنَ الْإِنْسَانِ لَمْ يَأتِ لِيُخْدَمَ بَلْ لِيَخْدِمَ، وَيَبْذُلَ نَفْسَهُ فِدْيَةً عَنْ كَثِيرِينَ ".