Stand in the fear of God and listen to the Holy Gospel. A reading from the Gospel according to our teacher Saint Luke the Evangelist, and the pure disciple. May his blessings be with us all.
قِفُوا بِخَوْفِ اللهِ، وَأَنْصِتُوا لِسَمَاعِ الإِنْجِيلِ الْمُقَدَّسِ. فَصْلٌ مِنْ بِشَارَةِ الإِنْجِيلِ لِمُعَلِّمِنَا مَارْ لوقا الْبَشِيرِ، التِّلْمِيذِ الطَّاهِرِ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
From the Psalms of our teacher David the prophet. May his blessings be with us all.
مِنْ مَزَامِيرِ تَرَاتِيلِ مُعَلِّمِنَا دَاوُدَ النَّبِيِّ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
Matins Psalm
المزمور
	Psalms 71:5,6
(مزامير 71: 5,6)
He shall come down like rain upon a fleece , Like showers that water the earth. In His days the righteous shall flourish, And abundance of peace.
Ⲉϥⲉ̀ⲓ̀ ⲉ̀ⲡⲉⲥⲏⲧ ⲙ̀ⲫ̀ⲣⲏϯ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩⲙⲟⲩⲛϩⲱⲟⲩ ⲉ̀ϫⲉⲛ ⲟⲩⲥⲟⲣⲧ: ⲛⲉⲙ ⲙ̀ⲫ̀ⲣⲏϯ ⲛ̀ϩⲁⲛⲧⲉⲗⲧⲓⲗⲓ ⲉⲩⲑ̀ⲗⲏ ϩⲓϫⲉⲛ ⲡ̀ⲕⲁϩⲓ. Ⲉⲥⲉ̀ⲁ̀ϣⲁⲓ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲟⲩⲙⲉⲑⲙⲏⲓ ϧⲉⲛ ⲛⲉϥⲉ̀ϩⲟⲟⲩ: ⲛⲉⲙ ⲡ̀ⲁ̀ϣⲁⲓ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲟⲩϩⲓⲣⲏⲛⲏ. Ⲁ︦ⲗ︦.
يَنْزِلُ مِثْلَ الْمَطَرِ عَلَى الْجَزَّةِ، وَمِثْلَ قَطَرَاتٍ تَقْطُرُ عَلَى الْأَرْضِ. يُشْرِقُ في أَيَّامِهِ الْعَدْلُ، وَكَثْرَةُ السَّلَامِ.
People:
Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
الليلويا.
	Psalm Trailer for the Pope or a Bishop
(Ⲙⲁⲣⲟⲩϭⲁⲥϥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲧ̀ⲉⲕⲕ̀ⲗⲏⲥⲓⲁ̀...)
People:
Amen Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲙⲏⲛ Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
امين الليلويا.
Then the introduction to the Gospel is read.
ثم تقال مقدمة الأنجيل وهي:
Reader:
Blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord. Our Lord, God, Savior and King of us all, Jesus Christ, Son of the living God to whom is glory forever. Amen.
القارﺉُ:
مباركٌ الآتي باسمِ الربِّ إلهِ القواتِ، ربُّنا وإلهُنا ومخلصُنا وملكُنا كلِّنا، يسوعُ المسيحُ، ابنُ اللهِ الحيِّ، الذي لهُ المجدُ إلى الأبدِ. آمين.
Matins Gospel
الإنجيل
	Luke 11:20-28
(لوقا 11: 20-28)
20 But if I cast out demons with the finger of God, surely the kingdom of God has come upon you.
Ⲓⲥϫⲉ ⲇⲉ ⲁ̀ⲛⲟⲕ ϧⲉⲛ ⲟⲩⲧⲏⲃ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲫϯ ϯϩⲓⲟⲩⲓ̀ ⲛ̀ⲛⲓⲇⲉⲙⲱⲛ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ϩⲁⲣⲁ ⲁⲥⲫⲟϩ ⲉ̀ⲣⲱⲧⲉⲛ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ϯⲙⲉⲧⲟⲩⲣⲟ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲫϯ.
20 إِنْ كُنْتُ أَنَا بِإِصْبَعِ اللَّهِ أُخْرجُ الشَّيَاطِينَ، فَقَدْ أَقْبَلَ عَلَيْكُمْ مَلَكُوتُ اللَّهِ.
21 When a strong man, fully armed, guards his own palace, his goods are in peace.
Ϣⲱⲡ ⲅⲁⲣ ⲁⲣⲉϣⲁⲛ ⲡⲓϫⲱⲣⲓ ϧⲟⲕϥ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉϥⲁ̀ⲣⲉϩ ⲉ̀ⲧⲉϥⲁⲩⲗⲏ ϣⲁⲣⲉ ⲛⲉϥϩⲩⲡⲁⲣ ⲭⲟⲛⲧⲁ̀ ϣⲱⲡⲓ ϧⲉⲛ ⲟⲩϩⲓⲣⲏⲛⲏ.
21 إِذَا تَسَلَّحَ الْقَوِيُّ لِيَحْفَظَ دَارَهُ، فَأَمْوَالُهُ تَكُونُ فِي أَمَانٍ.
22 But when a stronger than he comes upon him and overcomes him, he takes from him all his armor in which he trusted, and divides his spoils.
Ⲉϣⲱⲡ ⲇⲉ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲩϫⲱⲣⲓ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟϥ ⲓ̀ ⲉ̀ϩ̀ⲣⲏⲓ ⲉ̀ϫⲱϥ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉϥϭⲣⲟ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟϥ ϣⲁϥⲱⲗⲓ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉϥϧⲱⲕ ⲫⲏ ⲉ̀ⲛⲁⲣⲉ ϩ̀ⲑⲏϥ ⲭⲏ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟϥ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ϣⲁϥϫⲱⲣ ⲛ̀ⲛⲉϥϣⲱⲗ.
22 وَإِذَا جَاءَهُ مَنْ هُوَ أَقْوَى مِنْهُ فَإِنَّهُ يَغْلِبُهُ، وَيَأْخُذُ سِلَاحَهُ الَّذِي كَانَ مُتَّكِلًا عَلَيْهِ، وَيُوَزِّعُ غَنَائِمَهُ.
23 He who is not with Me is against Me, and he who does not gather with Me scatters.
Ⲏ ⲧⲉⲛ̀ϥ̀ⲛⲉⲙⲏⲓ ⲁⲛ ⲁϥϯⲟⲩⲃⲏⲓ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲫⲏⲉⲧⲉⲛ̀ϥ̀ⲉⲣⲥⲩⲛⲁⲅⲓⲥⲑⲉ ⲛⲉⲙⲏⲓ ϥ̀ϫⲱⲣ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲓ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ.
23 مَنْ لَيْسَ مَعِي فَهُوَ عَلَيَّ، وَمَنْ لَا يَجْمَعُ مَعِي فَهُوَ يُبَدِّدُ.
24 “When an unclean spirit goes out of a man, he goes through dry places, seeking rest; and finding none, he says, ‘I will return to my house from which I came.’
Ⲉϣⲱⲡ ⲁⲣⲉϣⲁⲛ ⲡⲓⲡⲛ︦ⲁ︦ ⲛ̀ⲁⲕⲁⲑⲁⲣⲧⲟⲛ ⲓ̀ ⲉⲃⲟⲗ ϧⲉⲛ ⲡⲓⲣⲱⲙⲓ ϣⲁϥⲥⲓⲛⲓ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ϩⲓⲧⲉⲛ ϩⲁⲛⲙⲁⲛ̀ⲁⲑⲙⲱⲟⲩ ⲉϥⲕⲱϯ ⲛ̀ⲥⲁ ⲟⲩⲙⲁⲛ̀ⲙ̀ⲧⲟⲛ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁϥϣ̀ⲧⲉⲙϫⲓⲙⲓ ⲧⲟⲧⲉ ⲁϥϫⲟⲥ ϫⲉ ⲛⲁⲧⲁⲥⲑⲟ ⲉⲡⲁⲏⲓ ⲉⲧⲁⲓⲓ̀ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ⲛ̀ϧⲏⲧϥ.
24 وَإِذَا خَرَجَ الرُّوحُ النَّجِسُ مِنَ الْإِنْسَانِ، يَجْتَازُ فِي أَمَاكِنَ لَيْسَ فِيها مَاءٌ يَطْلُبُ رَاحَةً، وَإِذْ لَا يَجِدُ يَقُولُ حِينَئِذٍ: أَرْجِعُ إِلَى بَيْتِيَ الَّذِي خَرَجْتُ مِنْهُ.
25 And when he comes, he finds it swept and put in order.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁϥϣⲁⲛⲓ̀ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉϥϫⲉⲙϥ ⲉϥⲥ̀ⲣⲱϥⲧ ⲉϥⲥ̀ⲣⲁϩ ⲉϥⲥⲉⲗⲥⲱⲗ.
25 وَمَتَى جَاءَ يَجِدُهُ فَارِغًا مَكْنُوسًا مُزَيَّنًا.
26 Then he goes and takes with him seven other spirits more wicked than himself, and they enter and dwell there; and the last state of that man is worse than the first.”
Ⲧⲟⲧⲉ ϣⲁϥϣⲉ ⲛⲁϥ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁϥϫⲓⲙⲓ ⲛ̀ⲕⲉⲍ︦ ⲙ̀ⲡⲛ︦ⲁ︦ ⲉⲩϩⲱⲟⲩ ⲉ̀ϩⲟⲧⲉⲣⲟϥ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁⲩϣⲁⲛϣⲉ ⲉ̀ϧⲟⲩⲛ ϣⲁⲩϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲙ̀ⲙⲁⲩ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ϣⲁⲣⲉ ⲛⲓϧⲁⲉⲩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲡⲓⲣⲱⲙⲓ ⲉ̀ⲧⲉⲙ̀ⲙⲁⲩ ⲧ̀ϩⲱⲟⲩ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϥϩⲟⲩⲁϯ.
26 حِينَئِذٍ يَذْهَبُ وَيَأْخُذُ سَبْعَةَ أَرْوَاحٍ آخَرِينَ شَرًّا مِنْهُ، فَتَدْخُلُ وَتَسْكُنُ هُنَاكَ، فَتَصِيرُ أَوَاخِرُ ذَلِكَ الْإِنْسَانِ شَرًّا مِنْ أَوَائِلِهِ! ".
27 And it happened, as He spoke these things, that a certain woman from the crowd raised her voice and said to Him, “Blessed is the womb that bore You, and the breasts which nursed You!”
Ⲁⲥϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲇⲉ ⲉϥϫⲱ ⲛ̀ⲛⲁⲓ ⲁ ⲟⲩⲥ̀ϩⲓⲙⲓ ϥⲁⲓ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩⲥ̀ⲙⲏ ⲉ̀ⲡ̀ϣⲱⲓ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ϧⲉⲛ ⲡⲓⲙⲏϣ ⲡⲉϫⲁⲥ ⲛⲁϥ ϫⲉ ⲱⲟⲩⲛ̀ⲓⲁⲧⲥ ⲛϯⲛⲉϫⲓ ⲉⲧⲁⲥϥⲓⲧⲕ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲛⲓⲉⲙⲛⲟϯ ⲉⲧⲁⲩϣⲁⲛⲟⲩϣⲕ.
27 وَفِيمَا هُوَ يَتَكَلَّمُ بِهَذَا، رَفَعَتِ امْرَأَةٌ صَوْتَهَا مِنَ الْجَمْعِ وَقَالَتْ لَهُ: " طُوبَى لِلْبَطْنِ الَّذِي حَمَلَكَ وَالثَّدْيَيْنِ اللَّذَيْنِ رَضِعْتَهُمَا ".
28 But He said, “More than that, blessed are those who hear the word of God and keep it!”
Ⲛ̀ⲑⲟϥ ⲇⲉ ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ⲛⲁⲥ ϫⲉ ⲙⲉⲛⲟⲩⲛⲅⲉ ⲱⲟⲩⲛ̀ⲓⲁⲧⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ⲛⲏⲉⲧⲥⲱⲧⲉⲙ ⲉⲡⲓⲥⲁϫⲓ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲫϯ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉⲧⲁⲣⲉϩ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟϥ.
28 أَمَّا هُوَ فَقَالَ لَهَا: " بَلْ طُوبَى لِلَّذِينَ يَسْمَعُونَ كَلَامَ اللَّهِ وَيَحْفَظُونَهُ ".