Prophecies
النبوآت
	Exodus 2:23-3:5
(الخروج 2: 23-3: 5)
A reading from the Book of Exodus of Moses the prophet. May his holy blessings be with us. Amen.
Ⲉⲃⲟⲗϧⲉⲛ Ⲡⲓⲇⲟⲝⲟⲇⲟⲥ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ Ⲙⲱⲩ̀ⲥⲏⲥ ⲡⲓⲡ̀ⲣⲟⲫⲏⲧⲏⲥ: ⲉ̀ⲣⲉⲡⲉϥⲥ̀ⲙⲟⲩ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ ϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲛⲉⲙⲁⲛ ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ ⲉϥϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ:
من سفر الخروج لموسى النبي بركته المقدسة تكون معنا. آمين.
23 Now it happened in the process of time that the king of Egypt died. Then the children of Israel groaned because of the bondage, and they cried out; and their cry came up to God because of the bondage.
23 وَحَدَثَ مِنْ بَعْدِ تِلْكَ الْأَيَّامِ الْكَثِيرَةِ أَنَّ مَلِكَ مِصْرَ مَاتَ. وَتَنَهَّدَ بَنُو إِسْرَائِيلَ مِنْ خِدْمَتِهِمْ وَصَرَخُوا، فَصَعِدَ صُرَاخُهُم إِلَى اللَّهِ مِنْ أَجْلِ الْخِدْمَةِ.
24 So God heard their groaning, and God remembered His covenant with Abraham, with Isaac, and with Jacob.
24 فَسَمِعَ اللَّهُ أَنِينَهُمْ، فَتَذَكَّرَ اللَّهُ مِيثَاقَهُ مَعَ إِبْرَاهِيمَ وَإِسْحَاقَ وَيَعْقُوبَ.
25 And God looked upon the children of Israel, and God acknowledged them.
25 وَنَظَرَ اللَّهُ إِلَى بَنِي إِسْرَائِيلَ وَظَهَرَ لَهُمْ.
1 Now Moses was tending the flock of Jethro his father-in-law, the priest of Midian. And he led the flock to the back of the desert, and came to Horeb, the mountain of God.
1 وَكَانَ مُوسَى يَرْعَى غَنَمَ يَثْرُونَ حَمِيهِ كَاهِنِ مِدْيَانَ، فَسَاقَ الْغَنَمَ إِلَى مَا وَرَاءَ الْبَرِّيَّةِ وَجَاءَ إِلَى جَبَلِ اللَّهِ حُورِيبَ.
2 And the Angel of the Lord appeared to him in a flame of fire from the midst of a bush. So he looked, and behold, the bush was burning with fire, but the bush was not consumed.
2 وَظَهَرَ لَهُ مَلَاكُ الرَّبِّ بِلَهِيبِ نَارٍ مِنْ وَسَطِ الْعُلَّيْقَةِ. فَنَظَرَ وَإِذَا الْعُلَّيْقَةُ تَتَوَقَّدُ بِالنَّارِ، وَهِيَ لَا تَحْتَرِقُ.
3 Then Moses said, “I will now turn aside and see this great sight, why the bush does not burn.”
3 فَقَالَ مُوسَى: " أَمِيلُ الْآنَ لأَنْظُرَ هَذَا الْمَنْظَرَ الْعَظِيمَ. مَا بَالُ الْعُلَّيْقَةِ لَا تَحْتَرِقُ؟ ".
4 So when the Lord saw that he turned aside to look, God called to him from the midst of the bush and said, “Moses, Moses!” And he said, “Here I am.”
4 فَلَمَّا رَأَى الرَّبُّ أَنَّهُ قَدْ مَالَ لِيَنْظُرَ، نَادَاهُ الرَّبُّ مِنْ وَسَطِ الْعُلَّيْقَةِ وَقَالَ: " مُوسَى، مُوسَى! ". فَقَالَ: " هأَنَذَا ".
5 Then He said, “Do not draw near this place. Take your sandals off your feet, for the place where you stand is holy ground.”
5 فَقَالَ: " لَا تَقْتَرِبْ إِلَى هَهُنَا. اِخْلَعْ نَعْلَيْكَ مِنْ رِجْلَيْكَ، لِأَنَّ الْمَوضِعَ الَّذِي أَنْتَ وَاقِفٌ عَلَيْهِ أَرْضٌ مُقَدَّسَةٌ ".
Glory be to the Holy Trinity, our God, forever and unto the ages of all ages. Amen.
Ⲟⲩⲱ̀ⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ϯⲧ̀ⲣⲓⲁⲥ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ Ⲡⲉⲛⲛⲟⲩϯ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛⲉⲙ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲛⲓⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲧⲏⲣⲟⲩ: ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ.
مجداً للثالوث القدوس إلهنا الى أبد الآبدين كلها آمين.
	Isaiah 1:2-18
(اشعياء 1: 2-18)
A reading from Isaiah, the prophet. May his holy blessings be with us. Amen.
Ⲉⲃⲟⲗϧⲉⲛ Ⲏⲥⲁⲏ̀ⲁⲥ ⲡⲓⲡ̀ⲣⲟⲫⲏⲧⲏⲥ: ⲉ̀ⲣⲉⲡⲉϥⲥ̀ⲙⲟⲩ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ ϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲛⲉⲙⲁⲛ ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ ⲉϥϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ:
من اشعياء النبي بركته المقدسة تكون معنا. آمين.
2 Hear, O heavens, and give ear, O earth! For the Lord has spoken: “I have nourished and brought up children, And they have rebelled against Me;
2 اِسْمَعِي أَيَّتُهَا السَّمَاوَاتُ وَأَصْغِيْ أَيَّتُها الْأَرْضُ، فَإِنَّ الرَّبَّ تَكَلَّمْ: " رَبَّيْتُ بَنِينَ ونَشَّأْتُهُم، أمَّا هُمْ فَعَصَوْا عَلَيَّ.
3 The ox knows its owner And the donkey its master’s crib; But Israel does not know, My people do not consider.”
3 الثَّوْرُ يَعْرِفُ قَانِيَهُ وَالْحِمَارُ مِعْلَفَ صَاحِبهِ، أَمَّا إِسْرَائِيلُ فَلَمْ يَعْرفْنِي. وَشَعْبِي لَمْ يَفْهَمْنِي ".
4 Alas, sinful nation, A people laden with iniquity, A brood of evildoers, Children who are corrupters! They have forsaken the Lord, They have provoked to anger The Holy One of Israel, They have turned away backward.
4 وَيْلٌ لِلْأُمَّةِ الْخَاطِئَةِ، الشَّعْبِ الْمُمْتَلئِ إِثْمًا، النَّسْلِ الخَبِيثِ، أَوْلَادِ الْمُخَالِفِينَ! تَرَكْتُمُ الرَّبَّ، وَأَغْضَبْتُمْ قُدُّوسَ إِسْرائِيلَ.
5 Why should you be stricken again? You will revolt more and more. The whole head is sick, And the whole heart faints.
5 سَتَحِلُّ بِكُمْ ضَرَبَاتٌ لِأَنَّكُمُ ازْدَدْتُم إِثْمًا. كُلُّ رَأْسٍ لِلْوَجَعِ، وَكُلُّ قَلْبٍ لِلْحُزْنِ.
6 From the sole of the foot even to the head, There is no soundness in it, But wounds and bruises and putrefying sores; They have not been closed or bound up, Or soothed with ointment.
6 مِنَ القَدَمِ إِلَى الرَّأْسِ، جِرَاحٌ وَكُلُومٌ، وَقُرْحَةٌ مُلْتَهِبَةٌ وَمَا مِنْ مَرْهَمٍ يُوضَعُ عَلَيْهَا وَلَا دُهْنٌ وَلَا عَصَائِبُ.
7 Your country is desolate, Your cities are burned with fire; Strangers devour your land in your presence; And it is desolate, as overthrown by strangers.
7 أَرْضُكُمْ تُخْرَبُ. وَمُدُنُكُمْ تُحْرَقُ بِالنَّارِ. وَكُوَرُكُمْ تُؤكَلُ قُدَّامَكُمْ، وَقَدْ خُرِّبَتْ وَهَدَمَهَا الشُّعُوبُ الْغُرَبَاءُ.
8 So the daughter of Zion is left as a booth in a vineyard, As a hut in a garden of cucumbers, As a besieged city.
8 وَتَبْقَى ابْنَةُ صِهْيَوْنَ كَمِظَلَّةٍ فِي كَرْمٍ، وكَمِثْلِ المَحْرَسِ المُنْقَطِعِ فِي الْمَقْثَأَةِ، وَكَالْمَدِينَةِ الْمَنْهُوبَةِ.
9 Unless the Lord of hosts Had left to us a very small remnant, We would have become like Sodom, We would have been made like Gomorrah.
9 وَلَولَا أَنَّ رَبَّ الْجُنُودِ أبْقَى لَنَا بَقِيَّةً لَصِرْنَا مِثْلَ سَدُومَ وَشَابَهْنَا عَمُورَةَ.
10 Hear the word of the Lord, You rulers of Sodom; Give ear to the law of our God, You people of Gomorrah:
10 اِسْمَعُوا كَلَامَ الرَّبِّ يَا قُضَاةَ سَدُومَ، أَصْغُوا إِلَى شَرِيعَةِ إِلَهِنَا يَا شَعْبَ عَمُورَةَ:
11 “To what purpose is the multitude of your sacrifices to Me?” Says the Lord. “I have had enough of burnt offerings of rams And the fat of fed cattle. I do not delight in the blood of bulls, Or of lambs or goats.
11 " مَا فَائِدَتِي مِنْ كَثْرَةِ ذَبَائِحِكُمْ، يَقُولُ الرَّبُّ؟ قَدْ شَبِعْتُ مِنْ مُحْرَقَاتِ الْكِبَاشِ وَشَحْمِ الْمُسَمَّنَاتِ، وَأَصْبَحَ دَمُ الْعُجُولِ وَالْحُمْلَانِ وَالتُّيُوسِ لَا يُرْضِينِي.
12 “When you come to appear before Me, Who has required this from your hand, To trample My courts?
12 حِينَمَا تَأْتُونَ لِتَظْهَرُوا أَمَامِي، مَنْ طَلَبَ هَذَا مِنْ أَيدِيِكُمْ حَتَّى تَدُوسُوا دُورِي؟
13 Bring no more futile sacrifices; Incense is an abomination to Me. The New Moons, the Sabbaths, and the calling of assemblies— I cannot endure iniquity and the sacred meeting.
13 لَا تَعُودُوا تَأْتُونَي بِتَقْدِمَةٍ بَاطِلَةٍ، إِنَّمَا الْبَخُورُ هُوَ مَكْرَهَةٌ لِي. رُؤُوسُ شُهُورُكُمْ وَسُبُوتُكُمْ وَأَعْيَادُكُمْ لَسْتُ أَطِيقُهَا.
14 Your New Moons and your appointed feasts My soul hates; They are a trouble to Me, I am weary of bearing them.
14 إِنَّمَا هِيَ إِثْمٌ وَاحْتِفَالُ رُؤُوسِ شُهُورِكُمْ وَأَعْيَادُكُمْ بَغَضَتْهَا نَفْسِي. صَارَتْ عَلَيَّ ثِقْلًا. وَقَدْ سَئِمْتُ اِحْتِمَالَهَا.
15 When you spread out your hands, I will hide My eyes from you; Even though you make many prayers, I will not hear. Your hands are full of blood.
15 فَحِينَ تَبْسُطُونَ أَيْدِيَكُمْ أَسْتُرُ عَيْنَيَّ عَنْكُمْ، وَإِنْ أَكْثَرْتُمُ الصَّلَاةَ لَا أَسْتَمِعُ لَكُمْ. لِأَنَّ أَيْدِيَكُمْ مَمْلُوءَةٌ مِنَ الدِّمَاءِ.
16 “Wash yourselves, make yourselves clean; Put away the evil of your doings from before My eyes. Cease to do evil,
16 فَاغْتَسِلُوا. وَتَطَهَّرُوا. وَأَزِيلُوا شَرَّ أَعْمَالِكُمْ مِنْ أَمَامَ عَيْنَيَّ. وَكُفَّوا عَنِ الْإِسَاءَةِ.
17 Learn to do good; Seek justice, Rebuke the oppressor; Defend the fatherless, Plead for the widow.
17 تَعَلَّمُوا الْإِحْسَانَ وَالْتَمِسُوا الْإِنْصَافَ. أَغِيثُوا الْمَظْلُومَ. وَانصِفُوا الْيَتِيمَ. وَحَامُوا عَنِ الْأَرْمَلَةِ.
18 “Come now, and let us reason together,” Says the Lord, “Though your sins are like scarlet, They shall be as white as snow; Though they are red like crimson, They shall be as wool.
18 تَعَالَوْا نَتَحَاجَجُ، يَقُولُ الرَّبُّ. إِنْهُ وَلَوْ كَانَتْ خَطَايَاكُمْ كَالْقِرْمِزِ تَبْيَضُّ كَالثَّلْجِ. وَلَوْ كَانَتْ حَمْرَاءَ كَصَبْغِ الدُّودِ تَصِيرُ كَالصُّوفِ.
Glory be to the Holy Trinity, our God, forever and unto the ages of all ages. Amen.
Ⲟⲩⲱ̀ⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ϯⲧ̀ⲣⲓⲁⲥ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ Ⲡⲉⲛⲛⲟⲩϯ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛⲉⲙ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲛⲓⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲧⲏⲣⲟⲩ: ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ.
مجداً للثالوث القدوس إلهنا الى أبد الآبدين كلها آمين.