Prophecies
النبوآت
	Exodus 2:11-20
(الخروج 2: 11-20)
A reading from the Book of Exodus of Moses the prophet. May his holy blessings be with us. Amen.
Ⲉⲃⲟⲗϧⲉⲛ Ⲡⲓⲇⲟⲝⲟⲇⲟⲥ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ Ⲙⲱⲩ̀ⲥⲏⲥ ⲡⲓⲡ̀ⲣⲟⲫⲏⲧⲏⲥ: ⲉ̀ⲣⲉⲡⲉϥⲥ̀ⲙⲟⲩ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ ϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲛⲉⲙⲁⲛ ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ ⲉϥϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ:
من سفر الخروج لموسى النبي بركته المقدسة تكون معنا. آمين.
11 Now it came to pass in those days, when Moses was grown, that he went out to his brethren and looked at their burdens. And he saw an Egyptian beating a Hebrew, one of his brethren.
11 وَحَدَثَ فِي تِلْكَ الْأَيَّامِ لَمَّا كَبِرَ مُوسَى أَنَّهُ خَرَجَ إِلَى إِخْوَتِهِ لِيَنْظُرَ أَثْقَالُهُمْ، فَرَأَى رَجُلًا مِصْرِيًّا يَضْرِبُ رَجُلًا عِبْرَانِيًّا مِنْ إِخْوَتِهِ.
12 So he looked this way and that way, and when he saw no one, he killed the Egyptian and hid him in the sand.
12 فَالْتَفَتَ إِلَى هُنَا وَهُنَاكَ فَلَمْ يَرَ أَحَدًا، فَقَتَلَ الْمِصْرِيَّ وَطَمَرَهُ فِي الرَّمْلِ.
13 And when he went out the second day, behold, two Hebrew men were fighting, and he said to the one who did the wrong, “Why are you striking your companion?”
13 ثُمَّ خَرَجَ فِي الْيَوْمِ الثَّانِـي فَإِذَا بِرَجُلَيْنِ عِبْرَانِيَّيْنِ يَتَضَارَبَانِ، فَقَالَ لِلْمُعْتَدِي: " لِمَاذَا تَضْرِبُ صَاحِبَكَ؟ ".
14 Then he said, “Who made you a prince and a judge over us? Do you intend to kill me as you killed the Egyptian?” So Moses feared and said, “Surely this thing is known!”
14 فَقَالَ: " مَنْ أَقَامَكَ رَئِيسًا وَحَاكِمًا عَلَيْنَا؟ أَتُرِيدُ أَنْ تَقْتُلَنِي كَمَا قَتَلْتَ الْمِصْرِيَّ أَمْسُ؟! ". فَخَافَ مُوسَى وَقَالَ: " إِذًا الْخَبَرُ قَدْ ذَاعَ ".
15 When Pharaoh heard of this matter, he sought to kill Moses. But Moses fled from the face of Pharaoh and dwelt in the land of Midian; and he sat down by a well.
15 فَسَمِعَ فِرْعَوْنُ بِهَذَا الْخَبَرِ، فَطَلَبَ أَنْ يَقْتُلَ مُوسَى. فَهَرَبَ مُوسَى مِنْ وَجْهِ فِرْعَوْنَ وَسَكَنَ فِي أَرْضِ مِدْيَانَ، وَجَلَسَ عِنْدَ الْبِئْرِ.
16 Now the priest of Midian had seven daughters. And they came and drew water, and they filled the troughs to water their father’s flock.
16 وَكَانَ لِكَاهِنِ مِدْيَانَ سَبْعُ بَنَاتٍ، يَرْعَيْنَ غَنَمَ أَبِيهِنَّ يَثْرُونَ، فَكُنَّ يَأْتِينَ إِلَى الْمَاءِ وَيَمْلَأْنَ الْأَجْرَانَ لِيَسْقِينَ غَنَمَ أَبِيهِنَّ.
17 Then the shepherds came and drove them away; but Moses stood up and helped them, and watered their flock.
17 فَجَاءَ الرُّعَاةُ وَطَرَدُوهُنَّ. فَقَامَ مُوسَى وَأَنْجَدَهُنَّ وَسَقَى غَنَمَهُنَّ.
18 When they came to Reuel their father, he said, “How is it that you have come so soon today?”
18 فَلَمَّا جِئْنَ إِلَى رَعُوئِيلَ أَبِيهِنَّ. قَالَ: " مَا بَالُكُّنَّ أَسْرَعْتُنَّ فِي الْمَجِيءِ الْيَوْمَ؟ ".
19 And they said, “An Egyptian delivered us from the hand of the shepherds, and he also drew enough water for us and watered the flock.”
19 فَقُلْنَ: " إِنَّ رَجُلًا مِصْرِيًّا خَلَّصَنَا مِنْ أَيْدِي الرُّعَاةِ، وَإِنَّهُ اِسْتَقَى لَنَا أَيْضًا وَسَقَى الْغَنَمَ ".
20 So he said to his daughters, “And where is he? Why is it that you have left the man? Call him, that he may eat bread.”
20 فَقَالَ لِبَنَاتِهِ: " وَأَيْنَ هُوَ؟ لِمَاذَا تَرَكْتُنَّ الرَّجُلَ؟ ادْعُونَهُ لِيَأْكُلَ طَعَامًا ".
Glory be to the Holy Trinity, our God, forever and unto the ages of all ages. Amen.
Ⲟⲩⲱ̀ⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ϯⲧ̀ⲣⲓⲁⲥ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ Ⲡⲉⲛⲛⲟⲩϯ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛⲉⲙ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲛⲓⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲧⲏⲣⲟⲩ: ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ.
مجداً للثالوث القدوس إلهنا الى أبد الآبدين كلها آمين.
	Isaiah 5:17-25
(اشعياء 5: 17-25)
A reading from Isaiah, the prophet. May his holy blessings be with us. Amen.
Ⲉⲃⲟⲗϧⲉⲛ Ⲏⲥⲁⲏ̀ⲁⲥ ⲡⲓⲡ̀ⲣⲟⲫⲏⲧⲏⲥ: ⲉ̀ⲣⲉⲡⲉϥⲥ̀ⲙⲟⲩ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ ϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲛⲉⲙⲁⲛ ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ ⲉϥϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ:
من اشعياء النبي بركته المقدسة تكون معنا. آمين.
17 Then the lambs shall feed in their pasture, And in the waste places of the fat ones strangers shall eat.
17 وَتَرْعَى الْحُمْلَانُ بِحَقِّهَا حَيْثُمَا تُسَاقُ كَالثِّيرَانِ، وَالْبَرَارِيُّ الَّتِي صَارَتْ خِصْبَةً تَأْكُلُ مِنْهَا الْغُرَبَاءُ.
18 Woe to those who draw iniquity with cords of vanity, And sin as if with a cart rope;
18 وَيْلٌ لِلْجَاذِبِينَ الْإِثْمَ بِحِبَالِ الْبَاطِلِ، وَخَطَايَاهُمْ مِثْلُ أَمْرَاسِ العَجَلَةِ،
19 That say, “Let Him make speed and hasten His work, That we may see it; And let the counsel of the Holy One of Israel draw near and come, That we may know it.”
19 الْقَائِلِينَ: " لِيُبَادِرْ، وَليُعَجِّلْ فِي عَمَلِهِ لِكَيْ نَرَى. وَلْتَقْتَرِبْ وَتَحْضُرْ مَشُورَةُ قُدُّوسِ إِسْرَائِيلَ حَتَّى نَعْلَمَ ".
20 Woe to those who call evil good, and good evil; Who put darkness for light, and light for darkness; Who put bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter!
20 وَيْلٌ لِلْقَائِلِينَ لِلْخَيْرِ شَرًّا وَلِلشَّرِّ خَيْرًا، الْجَاعِلِينَ الظَّلَامَ نُورًا وَالنُّورَ ظَلَامًا، الْقَائِلِينَ عَنِ الْحُلْوِ مُرًّا وَالْمُرِّ حُلْوًا.
21 Woe to those who are wise in their own eyes, And prudent in their own sight!
21 وَيْلٌ لِلَّذِينَ هُمْ حُكَمَاءُ فِي أَعْيُنِ أَنفُسِهِمْ، وَالْفُهَمَاءِ عِنْدَ ذَوَاتِهِمْ.
22 Woe to men mighty at drinking wine, Woe to men valiant for mixing intoxicating drink,
22 وَيْلٌ لِلْأَقْويَاءِ الَّذِينَ يَشْرَبُونَ الْخَمْرَ، وَلِلْأَبْطَالِ الَّذِينَ يَمْزِجُونَ الْمُسْكِرَ.
23 Who justify the wicked for a bribe, And take away justice from the righteous man!
23 الَّذِينَ يُبَرِّرُونَ الْمُنافِقَ مِنْ أَجْلِ الرَّشْوَةِ، وَيَنْزِعُونَ حَقَّ البَارِّ.
24 Therefore, as the fire devours the stubble, And the flame consumes the chaff, So their root will be as rottenness, And their blossom will ascend like dust; Because they have rejected the law of the Lord of hosts, And despised the word of the Holy One of Israel.
24 فَلِذَلِكَ كما يَحْتَرِقُ القَشُّ بِجَمْرِ النَّارِ، وَيَلْتَهِبُ بِلَهِيبِهِ الْمُشْتَعِلِ، فَهَكَذَا يَكُونُ أَصْلُهُمْ كَالْغُبَارِ وَزَهْرُهُمْ كَالْهَشِيمِ. لِأَنَّهُمْ رَذَلُوا شَرِيعَةَ رَبِّ الْجُنُودِ، وَاسْتَهَانُوا بِكَلِمَةِ قُدُّوسِ إِسْرَائِيلَ.
25 Therefore the anger of the Lord is aroused against His people; He has stretched out His hand against them And stricken them, And the hills trembled. Their carcasses were as refuse in the midst of the streets. For all this His anger is not turned away, But His hand is stretched out still.
25 فَحَمِيَ غَضَبُ رَبِّ الصَّباؤُوتِ عَلَى شَعْبِهِ، وَرَفَعَ يَدَهُ عَلَيْهِمْ وَضَرَبَهُمْ، وَسَخَطَ عَلَى الْجِبَالِ وَصَارَتْ جُثَثُ مَوْتَاهُمْ مِثْلَ الزِّبْلِ فِي وَسَطِ الطَّرِيقِ. وَمَعَ هَذَا كُلِّهِ لَمْ يَرْتَدَّ غَضَبُهُ، بَلْ يَدُهُ لَمْ تَزَلْ عَالِيَةً مَمْدُودَةً.
Glory be to the Holy Trinity, our God, forever and unto the ages of all ages. Amen.
Ⲟⲩⲱ̀ⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ϯⲧ̀ⲣⲓⲁⲥ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ Ⲡⲉⲛⲛⲟⲩϯ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛⲉⲙ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲛⲓⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲧⲏⲣⲟⲩ: ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ.
مجداً للثالوث القدوس إلهنا الى أبد الآبدين كلها آمين.