Stand in the fear of God and listen to the Holy Gospel. A reading from the Gospel according to our teacher Saint Luke the Evangelist, and the pure disciple. May his blessings be with us all.
قِفُوا بِخَوْفِ اللهِ، وَأَنْصِتُوا لِسَمَاعِ الإِنْجِيلِ الْمُقَدَّسِ. فَصْلٌ مِنْ بِشَارَةِ الإِنْجِيلِ لِمُعَلِّمِنَا مَارْ لوقا الْبَشِيرِ، التِّلْمِيذِ الطَّاهِرِ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
From the Psalms of our teacher David the prophet. May his blessings be with us all.
مِنْ مَزَامِيرِ تَرَاتِيلِ مُعَلِّمِنَا دَاوُدَ النَّبِيِّ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
Matins Psalm
المزمور
	Psalms 109:5,6,8
(مزامير 109: 5,6,8)
The Lord has sworn And will not relent, You are a priest forever According to the order of Melchizedek. The Lord is at Your right hand. Therefore He shall lift up the head.
Ⲁϥⲱⲣⲕ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ Ⲡⲟ︦ⲥ︦ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛ̀ⲛⲉϥⲟⲩⲱⲙ ⲛ̀ϩ̀ⲑⲏϥ: ϫⲉ ⲛ̀ⲑⲟⲕ ⲡⲉ ⲫ̀ⲟⲩⲏⲃ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲕⲁⲧⲁ ⲧ̀ⲧⲁⲝⲓⲥ ⲙ̀Ⲙⲉⲗⲭⲓⲥⲉⲇⲉⲕ: Ⲡⲟ︦ⲥ︦ ⲥⲁⲟⲩⲓ̀ⲛⲁⲙ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲕ: ⲉⲑⲃⲉ ⲫⲁⲓ ⲉϥⲉ̀ϭⲓⲥⲓ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩⲁ̀ⲫⲉ. ⲁ︦ⲗ︦.
أَقْسَمَ الرَّبُّ وَلَنْ يَنْدَمَ: " أَنَّكَ أَنْتَ هُوَ الْكَاهِنُ إِلَى الأَبَدِ عَلَى طَقْسِ مَلْكِيصَادَقَ ". الرَّبُّ عَنْ يَمِينِكَ، لِذلِكَ يَرْفَعُ رَأسًا. هَلِّلُويَا.
People:
Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
الليلويا.
	Psalm Trailer for the Pope or a Bishop
(Ⲙⲁⲣⲟⲩϭⲁⲥϥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲧ̀ⲉⲕⲕ̀ⲗⲏⲥⲓⲁ̀...)
People:
Amen Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲙⲏⲛ Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
امين الليلويا.
Then the introduction to the Gospel is read.
ثم تقال مقدمة الأنجيل وهي:
Reader:
Blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord. Our Lord, God, Savior and King of us all, Jesus Christ, Son of the living God to whom is glory forever. Amen.
القارﺉُ:
مباركٌ الآتي باسمِ الربِّ إلهِ القواتِ، ربُّنا وإلهُنا ومخلصُنا وملكُنا كلِّنا، يسوعُ المسيحُ، ابنُ اللهِ الحيِّ، الذي لهُ المجدُ إلى الأبدِ. آمين.
Matins Gospel
الإنجيل
	Luke 6:17-23
(لوقا 6: 17-23)
17 And He came down with them and stood on a level place with a crowd of His disciples and a great multitude of people from all Judea and Jerusalem, and from the seacoast of Tyre and Sidon, who came to hear Him and be healed of their diseases,
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉⲧⲁϥⲓ̀ ⲉ̀ϧ̀ⲣⲏⲓ ⲛⲉⲙⲱⲟⲩ ϥⲟ̀ϩⲓ ⲉ̀ⲣⲁⲧϥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲟⲩⲙⲁⲛ̀ⲕⲟⲓ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲟⲩⲙⲏϣ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲛⲉϥⲙⲁⲑⲏⲧⲏⲥ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲕⲉⲙⲏϣ ⲉϥⲟϣ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ϧⲉⲛ ϯⲓⲟⲩⲇⲉⲁ̀ ⲧⲏⲣⲥ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲓⲗ︦ⲏ︦ⲙ︦ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ϧⲉⲛ ϯⲡⲁⲣⲁⲗⲓⲁ̀ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲧⲩⲣⲟⲥ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲧ̀ⲥⲓⲇⲱⲛ ⲛⲏⲉ̀ⲧⲁⲩⲓ̀ ⲉ̀ⲥⲱⲧⲉⲙ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟϥ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉϥⲧⲁⲗϭⲱⲟⲩ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗϧⲉⲛ ⲛⲟⲩϣⲱⲛⲓ.
17 وَنَزَلَ مَعَهُمْ وَوَقَفَ في مَوْضِعٍ خَلَاءٍ، مَعَ جَمْعٍ مِنْ تَلَامِيذِهِ، وَجُمْهورٍ كَثِيرٍ مِنَ الشَّعْبِ، مِنْ جَمِيعِ الْيَهُودِيَّةِ وَأُورُشَلِيمَ وَمِنْ سَاحِلِ صُورَ وَصَيْدَا، الَّذِينَ جَاءُوا لِيَسْمَعُوا مِنهُ وَيَشفِيَهِمْ مِنْ أَمْرَاضِهِمْ،
18 as well as those who were tormented with unclean spirits. And they were healed.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛⲏⲉ̀ⲧⲁⲩⲧ̀ϩⲉⲙⲕⲟ ⲙ̀ⲙⲱⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲛⲓⲡ︦ⲛ︦ⲁ︦ ⲛ̀ⲁ̀ⲕⲁⲑⲁⲣⲧⲟⲛ ⲛⲁϥⲉⲣⲫⲁϧⲣⲓ ⲉ̀ⲣⲱⲟⲩ.
18 وَالْمُعَذَّبُونَ مِنَ الأَرْوَاحِ النَّجِسَةِ كَانَ يَشْفِيهِمْ.
19 And the whole multitude sought to touch Him, for power went out from Him and healed them all.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛⲁⲣⲉ ⲡⲓⲙⲏϣ ⲧⲏⲣϥ ⲕⲱϯ ⲛ̀ⲥⲁ ϭⲓ ⲛⲉⲙⲁϥ ϫⲉ ⲟⲩⲏⲓ ⲁⲥ̀ⲛⲏⲟⲩ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟϥ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲟⲩϫⲟⲙ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛⲁϥⲧⲁⲗϭⲟ ⲙ̀ⲙⲱⲟⲩ ⲧⲏⲣⲟⲩ ⲡⲉ.
19 وَكَانَ كُلُّ الْجَمْعِ يَطْلُبُ أَنْ يَلْمِسَهُ؛ لِأَنَّ قُوَّةً كَانَتْ تَخْرُجُ مِنْهُ وَتَشْفِي الْجَمِيعَ.
20 Then He lifted up His eyes toward His disciples, and said: “Blessed are you poor, For yours is the kingdom of God.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛ̀ⲑⲟϥ ⲉⲧⲁϥϥⲁⲓ ⲛ̀ⲛⲉϥⲃⲁⲗ ⲉ̀ⲡ̀ϣⲱⲓ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϥⲙⲁⲑⲏⲧⲏⲥ ⲛⲁϥϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ⲱⲟⲩⲛ̀ⲓⲁⲧⲉⲛ ⲑⲏⲛⲟⲩ ⲛⲓϩⲏⲕⲓ ϫⲉ ⲑⲱⲧⲉⲛ ⲧⲉ ϯⲙⲉⲧⲟⲩⲣⲟ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲫϯ.
20 وَرَفَعَ عَيْنَيْهِ إِلَى تَلَامِيذِهِ وَقَالَ لَهُمْ: " طُوبَاكُمْ أيُّهَا الْمَسَاكِينُ بِالرُّوحِ؛ لِأَنَّ لَكُمْ مَلَكُوتَ اللَّهِ.
21 Blessed are you who hunger now, For you shall be filled. Blessed are you who weep now, For you shall laugh.
Ⲱⲟⲩⲛ̀ⲓⲁⲧⲉⲛ ⲑⲏⲛⲟⲩ ⲛⲏ ⲧϩⲟⲕⲉⲣ ϯⲛⲟⲩ ϫⲉ ⲧⲉⲧⲉⲛⲛⲁⲥⲓ ⲱⲟⲩⲛ̀ⲓⲁⲧⲉⲛ ⲑⲏⲛⲟⲩ ⲛⲏⲉⲧⲣⲓⲙⲓ ϯⲛⲟⲩ ϫⲉ ⲧⲉⲧⲉⲛⲛⲁⲥⲱⲃⲓ.
21 طُوبَاكُمْ أيُّهَا الْجِيَاعُ الآنَ؛ لِأَنَّكُمْ تُشْبَعُونَ. طُوبَاكُمْ أيُّهَا الْبَاكُونَ الآنَ؛ لِأَنَّكُمْ سَتَضْحَكُونَ.
22 Blessed are you when men hate you, And when they exclude you, And revile you, and cast out your name as evil, For the Son of Man’s sake.
Ⲱⲟⲩⲛ̀ⲓⲁⲧⲉⲛ ⲑⲏⲛⲟⲩ ⲉϣⲱⲡ ⲛⲧⲟⲩⲙⲉⲥⲧⲉ ⲑⲏⲛⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲛⲓⲣⲱⲙⲓ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲟⲩⲟⲩⲉⲧ ⲑⲏⲛⲟⲩ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲟⲩϣⲉϣ ⲑⲏⲛⲟⲩ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲟⲩϩⲓ ⲡⲉⲧⲉⲛⲣⲁⲛ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ⲙ̀ⲫ̀ⲣⲏϯ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩⲡⲉⲧϩⲱⲟⲩ ⲉⲑⲃⲉ ⲡ̀ϣⲏⲣⲓ ⲙ̀ⲫ̀ⲣⲱⲙⲓ.
22 طُوبَاكُمْ إِذا أبْغَضَكُمُ النَّاسُ، وَأَفْرَزُوكُمْ وَعَيَّرُوكُمْ، وَأَخْرَجُوا اسْمَكُمْ كَشِرِّيرٍ مِنْ أَجْلِ ابْنِ الْإِنْسَانِ.
23 Rejoice in that day and leap for joy! For indeed your reward is great in heaven, For in like manner their fathers did to the prophets.
Ⲣⲁϣⲓ ϧⲉⲛ ⲡⲓⲉ̀ϩⲟⲟⲩ ⲉ̀ⲧⲉⲙ̀ⲙⲁⲩ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲑⲉⲗⲏⲗ ϩⲏⲡⲡⲉ ⲅⲁⲣ ⲡⲉⲧⲉⲛⲃⲉⲭⲉ ⲟⲩⲛⲓϣϯ ⲡⲉ ⲛ̀ϩ̀ⲣⲏⲓ ⲉⲛ ⲧ̀ⲫⲉ ⲛⲁⲓ ⲅⲁⲣ ⲉ̀ⲛⲁⲩⲓ̀ⲣⲓ ⲙ̀ⲙⲱⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ⲛⲓⲡⲣⲟⲫⲏⲧⲏⲥ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲛⲟⲩⲓⲟϯ.
23 افْرَحُوا في ذلِكَ الْيَوْمِ وَتَهَلَّلُوا، فَهُوَذَا أَجْرُكُمْ عَظِيمٌ في السَّمَاءِ؛ لِأَنَّ آبَاءَهُمْ هكَذَا كَانُوا يَفْعَلُونَ بِالأَنْبِيَاءِ ".