Stand in the fear of God and listen to the Holy Gospel. A reading from the Gospel according to our teacher Saint Luke the Evangelist, and the pure disciple. May his blessings be with us all.
قِفُوا بِخَوْفِ اللهِ، وَأَنْصِتُوا لِسَمَاعِ الإِنْجِيلِ الْمُقَدَّسِ. فَصْلٌ مِنْ بِشَارَةِ الإِنْجِيلِ لِمُعَلِّمِنَا مَارْ لوقا الْبَشِيرِ، التِّلْمِيذِ الطَّاهِرِ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
From the Psalms of our teacher David the prophet. May his blessings be with us all.
مِنْ مَزَامِيرِ تَرَاتِيلِ مُعَلِّمِنَا دَاوُدَ النَّبِيِّ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
Matins Psalm
المزمور
	Psalms 9: 7-8
(مزامير 9: 7-8)
Sing praises to the Lord, who dwells in Zion! Declare His deeds among the people. When He avenges blood, He remembers them.
Ⲁ̀ⲣⲓⲯⲁⲗⲓⲛ ⲉ̀Ⲡⲟ︦ⲥ︦ ⲫⲏⲉ̀ⲧϣⲟⲡ ϧⲉⲛ Ⲥⲓⲱⲛ: ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲥⲁϫⲓ ϧⲉⲛ ⲛⲉϥϩ̀ⲃⲏⲟⲩⲓ̀ ϧⲉⲛ ⲛⲓⲉⲑⲛⲟⲥ: ϫⲉ ⲁϥⲕⲱϯ ⲛ̀ⲥⲁ ϩⲁⲛⲥ̀ⲛⲟϥ: ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁϥⲉⲣⲡⲟⲩⲙⲉⲩⲓ̀: ⲁ︦ⲗ︦.
رَتِّلُوا لِلرَّبِّ السَّاكِنِ فِي صِهْيَوْنَ، وَأَخْبِرُوا فِي الْأُمَمِ بِأَعْمَالِهِ. لِأَنَّهُ طَلَبَ الدِّمَاءَ، وَتَذَكَّرَهَا.
People:
Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
الليلويا.
	Psalm Trailer for the Pope or a Bishop
(Ⲙⲁⲣⲟⲩϭⲁⲥϥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲧ̀ⲉⲕⲕ̀ⲗⲏⲥⲓⲁ̀...)
People:
Amen Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲙⲏⲛ Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
امين الليلويا.
Then the introduction to the Gospel is read.
ثم تقال مقدمة الأنجيل وهي:
Reader:
Blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord. Our Lord, God, Savior and King of us all, Jesus Christ, Son of the living God to whom is glory forever. Amen.
القارﺉُ:
مباركٌ الآتي باسمِ الربِّ إلهِ القواتِ، ربُّنا وإلهُنا ومخلصُنا وملكُنا كلِّنا، يسوعُ المسيحُ، ابنُ اللهِ الحيِّ، الذي لهُ المجدُ إلى الأبدِ. آمين.
Matins Gospel
الإنجيل
	Luke 20:20-26
(لوقا 20: 20-26)
20 So they watched Him, and sent spies who pretended to be righteous, that they might seize on His words, in order to deliver Him to the power and the authority of the governor.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉⲧⲁⲩϯϩ̀ⲑⲏⲟⲩ ⲁⲩⲟⲩⲱⲣⲡ ϩⲁⲣⲟϥ ⲛ̀ϩⲁⲛⲣⲉϥⲭ̀ⲣⲟϥ ⲩⲉⲣⲙⲉⲧϣⲟⲃⲓ ⲉⲩϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ⲉ̀ⲣⲱⲟⲩ ϫⲉ ϩⲁⲛⲑ̀ⲙⲏⲓ ϩⲓⲛⲁ ⲛ̀ⲥⲉⲧⲁϩⲟϥ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩⲥⲁϫⲓ ϩⲱⲥⲧⲉ ⲉ̀ⲧⲏⲓϥ ⲛ̀ϯⲁⲣⲭⲏ ⲛⲉⲙ ϯⲉ̀ⲝⲟⲩⲥⲓⲁ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲡⲓϩⲏⲅⲉⲙⲱⲛ.
20 فَرَاقَبُوهُ وَأَرْسَلُوا إِلَيْهِ جَوَاسِيسَ يَتَرَاءَوْنَ أَنَّهُمْ صِدِّيقُونَ لِكَيْ يُمْسِكُوهُ بِكَلِمَةٍ، حَتَّى يُسَلِّمُوهُ إِلَى رِئَاسَةِ الْوَالِي وَسُلْطَانِهِ.
21 Then they asked Him, saying, “Teacher, we know that You say and teach rightly, and You do not show personal favoritism, but teach the way of God in truth:
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁⲩϣⲉⲛϥ ⲉⲩϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ϫⲉ ⲡⲓⲣⲉϥϯⲥ̀ⲃⲱ ⲧⲉⲛⲉ̀ⲙⲓ ϫⲉ ⲕ̀ⲥⲁϫⲓ ϧⲉⲛ ⲟⲩⲥⲱⲟⲩⲧⲉⲛ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲕ̀ϯⲥ̀ⲃⲱ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲕ̀ϭⲓ ϩⲟ ⲁⲛ ⲁⲗⲗⲁ ϧⲉⲛ ⲩⲙⲉⲑⲙⲏⲓ ⲕ̀ϯⲥ̀ⲃⲱ ⲙ̀ⲡⲓⲙⲱⲓⲧ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲫϯ.
21 فَسَأَلُوهُ قَائِلِينَ: " يَا مُعَلِّمُ، قَدْ عَلِمْنَا أَنَّكَ بِالصَّوَابِ تَتَكَلَّمُ وَتُعَلِّمُ، وَلَا تَأْخُذُ بِالْوجُوهِ، بَلْ تُعَلِّمُ طَرِيقَ اللَّهِ بِالْحَقِّ.
22 Is it lawful for us to pay taxes to Caesar or not?”
Ⲥ̀ϣⲉ ⲛ̀ϯϩⲱϯ ⲙ̀ⲡ̀ⲟⲩⲣⲟ ϣⲁⲛ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲛ.
22 أَيَجُوزُ لَنَا أَنْ نُعْطِيَ الْخَرَاجَ لِقَيْصَرَ أَمْ لَا؟ "
23 But He perceived their craftiness, and said to them, “Why do you test Me?
Ⲉⲧⲁϥϯϩ̀ⲑⲏϥ ⲇⲉ ⲉⲧⲟⲩⲙⲉⲧⲡⲁⲛⲟⲩⲣⲅⲟⲥ ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ.
23 فَفَطِنَ لِمَكْرِهِمْ فَقَالَ لَهُمْ: " لِمَاذَا تُجَرِّبُونَنِي؟
24 Show Me a denarius. Whose image and inscription does it have?” They answered and said, “Caesar’s.”
Ϫⲉ ⲙⲁⲧⲁⲙⲟⲓ ⲉ̀ⲟⲩⲥⲁⲑⲉⲣⲓ ⲛ̀ⲑⲱⲟⲩ ⲇⲉ ⲁⲩⲧⲁⲙⲟϥ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ⲛⲱⲟⲩ ϫⲉ ϯ ϩⲓⲕⲱⲛ ⲛⲉⲙ ϯⲉⲡⲓⲅⲣⲁⲫⲏⲉⲧϩⲓⲱⲧⲥ ⲛⲁ ⲓⲙ ⲛⲉ ⲛ̀ⲑⲱⲟⲩ ⲇⲉ ⲡⲉϫⲱⲟⲩ ϫⲉ ⲛⲁ ⲡ̀ⲟⲩⲣⲟ ⲛⲉ.
24 أَرُونِي دِينَارًا، لِمَنِ الصُّورَةُ وَالْكِتَابَةُ؟ " فَأَجَابُوا وَقَالُوا: " لِقَيْصَرِ ".
25 And He said to them, “Render therefore to Caesar the things that are Caesar’s, and to God the things that are God’s.”
Ⲛ̀ⲑⲟϥ ⲇⲉ ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ⲛⲱⲟⲩ ϫⲉ ϯⲛⲟⲩ ⲙⲁ ⲛⲁ ⲡ̀ⲟⲩⲣⲟ ⲙ̀ⲡ̀ⲟⲩⲣⲟ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲙⲁ ⲛⲁ ⲫϯ ⲙ̀ⲫϯ.
25 فَقَالَ لَهُمْ: " إِذًا أَوْفُوا مَا لِقَيْصَرَ لِقَيْصَرَ، وَمَا لِلَّهِ لِلَّهِ ".
26 But they could not catch Him in His words in the presence of the people. And they marveled at His answer and kept silent.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲙ̀ⲡⲟⲩϣ̀ϫⲉⲙϫⲟⲙ ⲉ̀ⲁⲙⲁϩⲓ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟϥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲟⲩⲥⲁϫⲓ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉⲙ̀ⲑⲟ ⲙ̀ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉⲧⲁⲩⲉⲣϣ̀ⲫⲏⲣⲓ ⲉ̀ϩ̀ⲣⲏⲓ ⲉ̀ϫⲉⲛ ⲡⲉϥϫⲓⲛⲉⲣⲟⲩⲱ ⲁⲩⲭⲁⲣⲱⲟⲩ.
26 فَلَمْ يَسْتَطِيعُوا أَنْ يَأْخُذُوهُ بِكَلِمَةٍ أَمَامَ الشَّعْبِ، وَتَعَجَّبُوا مِنْ جَوَابِهِ وَسَكَتُوا.