Stand in the fear of God and listen to the Holy Gospel. A reading from the Gospel according to our teacher Saint John the Evangelist, and the pure disciple. May his blessings be with us all.
قِفُوا بِخَوْفِ اللهِ، وَأَنْصِتُوا لِسَمَاعِ الإِنْجِيلِ الْمُقَدَّسِ. فَصْلٌ مِنْ بِشَارَةِ الإِنْجِيلِ لِمُعَلِّمِنَا مَارْ يوحنا الْبَشِيرِ، التِّلْمِيذِ الطَّاهِرِ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
From the Psalms of our teacher David the prophet. May his blessings be with us all.
مِنْ مَزَامِيرِ تَرَاتِيلِ مُعَلِّمِنَا دَاوُدَ النَّبِيِّ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
Matins Psalm
المزمور
	Psalms 144:8,9
(مزامير 144: 8,9)
All Your works shall praise You, O Lord, And Your saints shall bless You. They shall speak of the glory of Your kingdom, And talk of Your power, To make known to the sons of men His mighty acts.
Ⲛⲏⲉ︦ⲑ︦ⲩ︦ ⲛ̀ⲧⲁⲕ ⲉⲩⲉ̀ⲥ̀ⲙⲟⲩ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟⲕ: ⲡ̀ⲱ̀ⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲧⲉⲕⲙⲉⲧⲟⲩⲣⲟ ⲉⲩⲉ̀ⲥⲁϫⲓ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟϥ: ⲉⲩⲉ̀ϫⲱ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉⲕⲙⲉⲧϫⲱⲣⲓ: ⲉⲑⲣⲟⲩⲱⲛϩ ⲛ̀ⲛⲉⲕⲙⲉⲧϫⲱⲣϩ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ⲛ̀ⲛⲓϣⲏⲣⲓ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲛⲓⲣⲱⲙⲓ. ⲁ︦ⲗ︦.
قدِّيسُوكَ يُبَارِكُونَكَ. وَمَجْدَ مُلْكِكَ يَصِفُونَ. وَبِقُوَّتِكَ يَنْطقُونَ. لِيُظْهِرُوا لِبَنِي البَشَرِ قُدْرَتَكَ. هَلِّلُويَا.
People:
Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
الليلويا.
	Psalm Trailer for the Pope or a Bishop
(Ⲙⲁⲣⲟⲩϭⲁⲥϥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲧ̀ⲉⲕⲕ̀ⲗⲏⲥⲓⲁ̀...)
People:
Amen Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲙⲏⲛ Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
امين الليلويا.
Then the introduction to the Gospel is read.
ثم تقال مقدمة الأنجيل وهي:
Reader:
Blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord. Our Lord, God, Savior and King of us all, Jesus Christ, Son of the living God to whom is glory forever. Amen.
القارﺉُ:
مباركٌ الآتي باسمِ الربِّ إلهِ القواتِ، ربُّنا وإلهُنا ومخلصُنا وملكُنا كلِّنا، يسوعُ المسيحُ، ابنُ اللهِ الحيِّ، الذي لهُ المجدُ إلى الأبدِ. آمين.
Matins Gospel
الإنجيل
	John 1:43-51
(يوحنا 1: 43-51)
43 The following day Jesus wanted to go to Galilee, and He found Philip and said to him, “Follow Me.”
Ⲉ̀ⲡⲉϥⲣⲁⲥϯ ⲇⲉ ⲁϥⲟⲩⲱϣ ⲉ̀ⲓ̀ ⲉ̀ϯⲅⲁⲗⲓⲗⲉⲁ̀ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁϥϫⲓⲙⲓ ⲙ̀ⲫⲓⲗⲓⲡⲡⲟⲥ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ⲛⲁϥ ϫⲉ ⲙⲟϣⲓ ⲛ̀ⲥⲱⲓ.
43 وَفي الْغَدِ أيْضًا أرَادَ أَنْ يَأتِيَ إِلَى الْجَلِيلِ، فَوَجَدَ فِيلُبُّسَ فَقَالَ لَهُ يَسُوعُ: " اتْبَعْنِي ".
44 Now Philip was from Bethsaida, the city of Andrew and Peter.
Ⲫⲓⲗⲓⲡⲡⲟⲥ ⲇⲉ ⲛⲉ ⲟⲩⲣⲉⲙⲃⲏⲑⲥⲁⲓⲇⲁ ⲡⲉ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ϧⲉⲛ ⲑ̀ⲃⲁⲕⲓ ⲛ̀ⲁⲛⲇⲣⲉⲁⲥ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲡⲉⲧⲣⲟⲥ.
44 وَكَانَ فِيلُبُّسُ مِنْ بَيْتِ صَيْدَا، مِنْ مَدِينَةِ أندَرَاوُسَ وَبُطْرُسَ.
45 Philip found Nathanael and said to him, “We have found Him of whom Moses in the law, and also the prophets, wrote—Jesus of Nazareth, the son of Joseph.”
Ⲫⲓⲗⲓⲡⲡⲟⲥ ⲇⲉ ⲁϥϫⲓⲙⲓ ⲛ̀ⲛⲁⲑⲁⲛⲁⲏⲗ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ⲛⲁϥ ϫⲉ ⲫⲏⲉⲧⲁ ⲙⲱⲩ̀ⲥⲏⲥ ⲥ̀ϧⲁⲓ ⲉⲑⲃⲏⲧϥ ϩⲓ ⲡⲓⲛⲟⲙⲟⲥ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲛⲓⲡⲣⲟⲫⲏⲧⲏⲥ ⲁⲛϫⲉⲙϥ ⲉⲧⲉ Ⲓⲏ︦ⲥ︦ ⲡⲉ ⲡ̀ϣⲏⲣⲓ ⲛ̀ⲓⲱⲥⲏⲫ ⲡⲓⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ϧⲉⲛ ⲛⲁⲍⲁⲣⲉⲑ.
45 فَوَجَدَ فِيلُبُّسُ نَثَنَائِيلَ وَقَالَ لَهُ: " وَجَدْنَا الَّذِي كَتَبَ عَنْهُ مُوسَى في النَّامُوسِ وَالأَنْبِيَاءُ، يَسُوعَ ابْنَ يُوسُفَ الَّذِي مِنَ النَّاصِرَةِ ".
46 And Nathanael said to him, “Can anything good come out of Nazareth?” Philip said to him, “Come and see.”
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲡⲉϫⲉ ⲛⲁⲑⲁⲛⲁⲏⲗ ⲛⲁϥ ϫⲉ ⲁⲛ ⲟⲩⲟⲛ ϣ̀ϫⲟⲙ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲟⲩⲁ̀ⲅⲁⲑⲟⲛ ϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ϧⲉⲛ ⲛⲁⲍⲁⲣⲉⲑ ⲡⲉϫⲉ ⲫⲓⲗⲓⲡⲡⲟⲥ ⲛⲁϥ ϫⲉ ⲁ̀ⲙⲟⲩ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁ̀ⲛⲁⲩ.
46 فَقَالَ لَهُ نَثَنَائِيلُ: " هَلْ يُمْكِنُ أَنْ يَخْرُجَ مِنَ النَّاصِرَةِ صَالِحٌ؟ ". فَقَالَ لَهُ فِيلُبُّسُ: " تَعَالَ وَانْظُرْ ".
47 Jesus saw Nathanael coming toward Him, and said of him, “Behold, an Israelite indeed, in whom is no deceit!”
Ⲁϥⲛⲁⲩ ⲇⲉ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ Ⲓⲏ︦ⲥ︦ ⲉ̀ⲛⲁⲑⲁⲛⲁⲏⲗ ⲉϥⲛⲏⲟⲩ ϩⲁⲣⲟϥ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ⲉⲑⲃⲏⲧϥ ϫⲉ ⲓⲥ ϩⲏⲡⲡⲉ ⲧⲁⲫ̀ⲙⲏⲓ ⲓⲥ ⲟⲩⲓ̀ⲥⲣⲁⲏⲗⲓⲧⲏⲥ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲛ ⲇⲟⲗⲟⲥ ⲛ̀ϧⲏⲧϥ.
47 وَرَأَى يَسُوعُ نَثَنَائِيلَ مُقْبِلًا إلَيْهِ، فَقَالَ عَنْهُ: " هُوَذَا إسْرَائِيلِيٌّ حَقًّا لَا غِشَّ فِيهِ ".
48 Nathanael said to Him, “How do You know me?” Jesus answered and said to him, “Before Philip called you, when you were under the fig tree, I saw you.”
Ⲡⲉϫⲉ ⲛⲁⲑⲁⲛⲁⲏⲗ ⲛⲁϥ ϫⲉ ⲁⲕⲥⲱⲟⲩⲛ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲓ ⲑⲱⲛ ⲁϥⲉⲣⲟⲩⲱ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ Ⲓⲏ︦ⲥ︦ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ⲛⲁϥ ϫⲉ ⲙ̀ⲡⲁⲧⲉ ⲫⲓⲗⲓⲡⲡⲟⲥ ⲙⲟⲩϯ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟⲕ ⲉⲕⲭⲏ ϧⲁⲧⲟⲧⲥ ⲛ̀ϯⲃⲱ ⲛ̀ⲕⲉⲛⲧⲉ ⲁⲓⲛⲁⲩ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟⲕ.
48 فَقَالَ لَهُ نَثَنَائِيلُ: " مِنْ أيْنَ عَرَفْتَنِي؟ ". أجَابَ يَسُوعُ وَقَالَ لَهُ: " قَبْلَ أَنْ يَدْعُوَكَ فِيلُبُّسُ وَأَنْتَ تَحْتَ شَجَرَةِ التِّينِ، رَأيْتُكَ ".
49 Nathanael answered and said to Him, “Rabbi, You are the Son of God! You are the King of Israel!”
Ⲁϥⲉⲣⲟⲩⲱ ⲛⲁϥ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲛⲁⲑⲁⲛⲁⲏⲗ ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ⲛⲁϥ ϫⲉ ⲣⲁⲃⲃⲁⲓ ⲛ̀ⲑⲟⲕ ⲡⲉ ⲡ̀ϣⲏⲣⲓ ⲙ̀ⲫϯ ⲛ̀ⲑⲟⲕ ⲡⲉ ⲡ̀ⲟⲩⲣⲟ ⲙ̀ⲡⲓⲥ︦ⲗ︦.
49 أجَابَ نَثَنَائِيلُ وَقَالَ لَهُ: " يَا مُعَلِّمُ، أَنْتَ هُوَ ابْنُ اللَّهِ، أَنْتَ هُوَ مَلِكُ إسْرَائِيلَ ".
50 Jesus answered and said to him, “Because I said to you, ‘I saw you under the fig tree,’ do you believe? You will see greater things than these.”
Ⲁϥⲉⲣⲟⲩⲱ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ Ⲓⲏ︦ⲥ︦ ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ⲛⲁϥ ϫⲉ ⲁⲓϫⲟⲥ ⲛⲁⲕ ϫⲉ ⲁⲓⲛⲁⲩ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟⲕ ϧⲁⲣⲁⲧⲥ ⲛ̀ϯ ⲃⲱ ⲛ̀ⲕⲉⲛⲧⲉ ⲭ̀ⲛⲁϩϯ ϩⲁⲛⲛⲓϣϯ ⲉ̀ⲛⲁⲓ ⲉⲕⲉ̀ⲛⲁⲩ ⲉ̀ⲣⲱⲟⲩ.
50 أجَابَ يَسُوعُ وَقَالَ لَهُ: " هَلْ آمَنْتَ لأنِّي قُلْتُ لَكَ إنِّي رَأَيْتُكَ تَحْتَ شَجَرَةِ التِّينِ؟ سَوْفَ تَرَى أعْظَمَ مِنْ هذَا! "
51 And He said to him, “Most assuredly, I say to you, hereafter you shall see heaven open, and the angels of God ascending and descending upon the Son of Man.”
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ϫⲉ ⲁⲙⲏⲛ ⲁⲙⲏⲛ ϯϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ⲛⲱⲧⲉⲛ ϫⲉ ⲉⲣⲉⲧⲉⲛⲉ̀ⲛⲁⲩ ⲉ̀ⲧ̀ⲫⲉ ⲉⲥⲟⲩⲏ ⲛ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛⲓⲁⲅⲅⲉⲗⲟⲥ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲫϯ ⲉⲩⲛⲁ ⲉ̀ⲡ̀ϣⲱⲓ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉⲩⲛⲏⲟⲩ ⲉⲡⲉⲥⲏⲧ ⲛ̀ⲥⲁ ⲡ̀ϣⲏⲣⲓ ⲙ̀ⲫ̀ⲣⲱⲙⲓ
51 وَقَالَ لَهُ: " الْحَقَّ الْحَقَّ أَقُولُ لَكُمْ: إِنَّكُمْ سَوْفَ تَرَوْنَ السَّمَاءَ مَفْتُوحَةً، وَمَلَائِكَةَ اللَّهِ يَصْعَدُونَ وَيَنْزِلُونَ عَلَى ابْنِ الْإِنْسَانِ ".