Stand in the fear of God and listen to the Holy Gospel. A reading from the Gospel according to our teacher Saint Mark the Evangelist, and the pure disciple. May his blessings be with us all.
قِفُوا بِخَوْفِ اللهِ، وَأَنْصِتُوا لِسَمَاعِ الإِنْجِيلِ الْمُقَدَّسِ. فَصْلٌ مِنْ بِشَارَةِ الإِنْجِيلِ لِمُعَلِّمِنَا مَارْ مرقس الْبَشِيرِ، التِّلْمِيذِ الطَّاهِرِ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
From the Psalms of our teacher David the prophet. May his blessings be with us all.
مِنْ مَزَامِيرِ تَرَاتِيلِ مُعَلِّمِنَا دَاوُدَ النَّبِيِّ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
Matins Psalm
المزمور
	Psalms 73:2,11
(مزامير 73: 2,11)
Remember Your congregation, which You have purchased of old, The tribe of Your inheritance, which You have redeemed--This Mount Zion where You have dwelt. For God is my King from of old, Working salvation in the midst of the earth.
Ⲁⲕⲥⲱϯ ⲙ̀ⲡ̀ϣ̀ⲃⲱⲧ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲧⲉⲕⲕ̀ⲗⲏⲣⲟⲛⲟⲙⲓⲁ̀: ⲡⲓⲧⲱⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ Ⲥⲓⲱⲛ ⲫⲏⲉ̀ⲧⲁⲕϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲛ̀ϧ̀ⲣⲏⲓ ⲛ̀ϧⲏⲧϥ: Ⲫϯ ⲛ̀ⲑⲟⲕ ⲡⲉ ⲡⲉⲛⲟⲩⲣⲟ ϧⲁϫⲱϥ ⲙ̀ⲡ̀ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ: ⲁⲕⲉⲣϩⲱⲃ ⲉ̀ⲟⲩϫⲁⲓ ϧⲉⲛ ⲑ̀ⲙⲏϯ ⲙ̀ⲡ̀ⲕⲁϩⲓ. ⲁ︦ⲗ︦.
افْتَدَيْتَ قَضِيبَ مِيراثِكَ، جَبَلَ صِهْيَوْنَ هذَا الَّذِي سَكَنْتَ فِيهِ. أمَّا اللَّهُ فَهُوَ مَلِكُنَا قَبْلَ الدُّهُورِ، صَنَعَ خَلَاصًا في وَسَطِ الأرْضِ. هَلِّلُويَا.
People:
Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
الليلويا.
	Psalm Trailer for the Pope or a Bishop
(Ⲙⲁⲣⲟⲩϭⲁⲥϥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲧ̀ⲉⲕⲕ̀ⲗⲏⲥⲓⲁ̀...)
People:
Amen Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲙⲏⲛ Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
امين الليلويا.
Then the introduction to the Gospel is read.
ثم تقال مقدمة الأنجيل وهي:
Reader:
Blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord. Our Lord, God, Savior and King of us all, Jesus Christ, Son of the living God to whom is glory forever. Amen.
القارﺉُ:
مباركٌ الآتي باسمِ الربِّ إلهِ القواتِ، ربُّنا وإلهُنا ومخلصُنا وملكُنا كلِّنا، يسوعُ المسيحُ، ابنُ اللهِ الحيِّ، الذي لهُ المجدُ إلى الأبدِ. آمين.
Matins Gospel
الإنجيل
	Mark 8:34-9:1
(مرقس 8: 34-9: 1)
34 When He had called the people to Himself, with His disciples also, He said to them, “Whoever desires to come after Me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow Me.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉ̀ⲧⲁϥⲙⲟⲩϯ ⲉ̀ⲡⲓⲙⲏϣ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲛⲉϥⲙⲁⲑⲏⲧⲏⲥ ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ⲛⲱⲟⲩ ϫⲉ ⲫⲏⲉⲑⲟⲩⲱϣ ⲉ̀ⲓ̀ ⲥⲁⲙⲉⲛϩⲏⲓ ⲙⲁⲣⲉϥϫⲟⲗϥ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉϥⲱ̀ⲗⲓ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉϥⲥ̀ⲧⲁⲩⲣⲟⲥ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉϥⲙⲟϣⲓ ⲛ̀ⲥⲱⲓ.
34 وَدَعَا الْجَمْعَ وَتَلَامِيذَهُ وَقَالَ لَهُمْ: " مَنْ أرَادَ أَنْ يَأتِيَ وَرَائِي فَلْيُنْكِرْ نَفْسَهُ وَيَحْمِلْ صَلِيبَهُ وَيَتْبَعْنِي.
35 For whoever desires to save his life will lose it, but whoever loses his life for My sake and the gospel’s will save it.
Ⲫⲏ ⲅⲁⲣ ⲉⲑⲛⲁⲟⲩⲱϣ ⲉ̀ⲛⲟϩⲉⲙ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉϥⲯⲩⲭⲏ ⲉϥⲉ̀ⲧⲁⲕⲟⲥ ⲫⲏ ⲇⲉ ⲉⲑⲛⲁⲧⲁⲕⲟ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉϥⲯⲩⲭⲏ ⲉⲑⲃⲏⲧ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲉⲑⲃⲉ ⲡⲓⲉⲩⲁⲅⲅⲉⲗⲓⲟⲛ ⲉϥⲉ̀ⲛⲁϩⲙⲉⲥ.
35 لِأَنَّ مَنْ أرَادَ أَنْ يُخَلِّصَ نَفْسَهُ يُهْلِكُهَا، وَمَنْ يُهْلِكُ نَفْسَهُ مِنْ أَجْلِي وَمِنْ أَجْلِ الْإِنْجِيلِ فَهُوَ يُخَلِّصُهَا.
36 For what will it profit a man if he gains the whole world, and loses his own soul?
Ⲟⲩ ⲅⲁⲣ ⲉ̀ⲧⲉ ⲡⲓⲣⲱⲙⲓ ⲛⲁϫⲉⲙϩⲏⲟⲩ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟϥ ⲁϥϣⲁⲛϫⲉⲙϩⲏⲟⲩ ⲙ̀ⲡⲓⲕⲟⲥⲙⲟⲥ ⲧⲏⲣϥ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉϥϯⲟ̀ⲥⲓ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉϥⲯⲩⲭⲏ.
36 لِأَنَّهُ مَاذا يَنْتَفِعُ الْإِنْسَانُ لَوْ رَبِحَ الْعَالَمَ كُلَّهُ وَخَسِرَ نَفْسَهُ؟
37 Or what will a man give in exchange for his soul?
Ⲟⲩ ⲅⲁⲣ ⲉ̀ⲧⲉ ⲡⲓⲣⲱⲙⲓ ⲛⲁⲧⲏⲓϥ ⲛ̀ⲧ̀ϣⲉⲃⲓⲱ̀ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉϥⲯⲩⲭⲏ.
37 أوْ مَاذا يُعْطِي الْإِنْسَانُ فِدَاءً عَنْ نَفْسِهِ؟
38 For whoever is ashamed of Me and My words in this adulterous and sinful generation, of him the Son of Man also will be ashamed when He comes in the glory of His Father with the holy angels.”
Ⲫⲏ ⲅⲁⲣ ⲉⲑⲛⲁϣⲓⲡⲓ ⲉ̀ⲟⲩⲟⲛϩⲧ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲛⲁⲥⲁϫⲓ ϧⲉⲛ ⲡⲁⲓϫⲱⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ⲛⲱⲓⲕ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛ̀ⲣⲉϥⲉⲣⲛⲟⲃⲓ Ⲡ̀ϣⲏⲣⲓ ϩⲱϥ ⲙ̀Ⲫ̀ⲣⲱⲙⲓ ⲛⲁϯϣⲓⲡⲓ ⲛⲁϥ ϩⲟⲧⲁⲛ ⲁϥϣⲁⲛⲓ̀ ϧⲉⲛ ⲡ̀ⲱ̀ⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲡⲉϥⲓⲱⲧ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲛⲉϥⲁⲅⲅⲉⲗⲟⲥ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ
38 لِأَنَّ مَنْ يَخْزَى بِأَنْ يَعْتَرِفَ بِي وَبِكَلَامِي في هذَا الْجِيلِ الْفَاسِدِ وَالْخَاطِئِ، فَإِنَّ ابْنَ الْإِنْسَانِ أيْضًا يَسْتَحِي بِهِ مَتَى جَاءَ في مَجْدِ أبِيهِ مَعَ مَلَائِكَتِهِ الْقِدِّيسِينَ ".
1 And He said to them, “Assuredly, I say to you that there are some standing here who will not taste death till they see the kingdom of God present with power.”
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛⲁϥϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ⲛⲱⲟⲩ ϫⲉ ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ ϯϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ⲛⲱⲧⲉⲛ ϫⲉ ⲟⲩⲟⲛ ϩⲁⲛⲟⲩⲟⲛ ϧⲉⲛ ⲛⲏⲉⲧⲟ̀ϩⲓ ⲉ̀ⲣⲁⲧⲟⲩ ⲙ̀ⲡⲁⲓⲙⲁ ⲛ̀ⲥⲉⲛⲁϫⲉⲙϯⲡⲓ ⲙ̀ⲫ̀ⲙⲟⲩ ⲁⲛ ϣⲁⲧⲟⲩⲛⲁⲩ ⲉ̀ϯⲙⲉⲧⲟⲩⲣⲟ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ Ⲫϯ ⲉ̀ⲁⲥⲓ̀ ϧⲉⲛ ⲟⲩϫⲟⲙ.
1 وَكَانَ يَقُولُ لَهُمْ: " الْحَقَّ أَقُولُ لَكُمْ: إِنَّ قَوْمًا مِنَ الْقِيَامِ هَهُنَا لَا يَذُوقُونَ الْمَوْتَ حَتَّى يَرَوْا مَلَكُوتَ اللَّهِ قَدْ أَتَى بِقُوَّةٍ ".