Stand in the fear of God and listen to the Holy Gospel. A reading from the Gospel according to our teacher Saint Matthew the Evangelist, and the pure disciple. May his blessings be with us all.
قِفُوا بِخَوْفِ اللهِ، وَأَنْصِتُوا لِسَمَاعِ الإِنْجِيلِ الْمُقَدَّسِ. فَصْلٌ مِنْ بِشَارَةِ الإِنْجِيلِ لِمُعَلِّمِنَا مَارْ متى الْبَشِيرِ، التِّلْمِيذِ الطَّاهِرِ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
From the Psalms of our teacher David the prophet. May his blessings be with us all.
مِنْ مَزَامِيرِ تَرَاتِيلِ مُعَلِّمِنَا دَاوُدَ النَّبِيِّ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
Vespers Psalm
المزمور
	Psalms 44:9,18
(مزامير 44: 9,18)
Your throne, O God, is forever and ever; A scepter of righteousness is the scepter of Your kingdom. Therefore the people shall praise You forever and ever.
Ⲡⲉⲕⲑ̀ⲣⲟⲛⲟⲥ Ⲫϯ ϣⲁⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲡⲓⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ: ⲡⲓϣ̀ⲃⲱⲧ ⲙ̀ⲡ̀ⲥⲱⲩⲧⲉⲛ ⲡⲉ ⲡ̀ϣ̀ⲃⲱⲧ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲧⲉⲕⲙⲉⲧⲟⲩⲣⲟ: ⲉⲑⲃⲉ ⲫⲁⲓ ⲉⲩⲉ̀ⲟⲩⲱⲛϩ ⲛⲁⲕ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ϩⲁⲛⲗⲁⲟⲥ Ⲫϯ: ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛⲉⲙ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲡⲓⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ. ⲁ︦ⲗ︦.
كُرْسِيُّكَ يَا أللَّهُ إِلَى دَهْرِ الدُّهُورِ، وَقَضِيبُ الاسْتِقَامَةِ هُوَ قَضِيبُ مُلْكِكَ. مِنْ أَجْلِ ذَلِكَ تَعْتَرِفُ لَكَ الشُّعُوبُ يَا أللَّهُ، إِلَى الدَّهْرِ وإِلَى دَهْرِ الدَّاهِرينَ. هَلِّلُويَا.
People:
Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
الليلويا.
	Psalm Trailer for the Pope or a Bishop
(Ⲙⲁⲣⲟⲩϭⲁⲥϥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲧ̀ⲉⲕⲕ̀ⲗⲏⲥⲓⲁ̀...)
People:
Amen Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲙⲏⲛ Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
امين الليلويا.
Then the introduction to the Gospel is read.
ثم تقال مقدمة الأنجيل وهي:
Reader:
Blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord. Our Lord, God, Savior and King of us all, Jesus Christ, Son of the living God to whom is glory forever. Amen.
القارﺉُ:
مباركٌ الآتي باسمِ الربِّ إلهِ القواتِ، ربُّنا وإلهُنا ومخلصُنا وملكُنا كلِّنا، يسوعُ المسيحُ، ابنُ اللهِ الحيِّ، الذي لهُ المجدُ إلى الأبدِ. آمين.
Vespers Gospel
الإنجيل
	Matthew 16:21-26
(متى 16: 21-26)
21 From that time Jesus began to show to His disciples that He must go to Jerusalem, and suffer many things from the elders and chief priests and scribes, and be killed, and be raised the third day.
Ⲓⲥϫⲉⲛ ⲡⲓⲥⲏⲟⲩ ⲉ̀ⲧⲉⲙ̀ⲙⲁⲩ ⲁϥⲉⲣϩⲏⲧⲥ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ Ⲓⲏⲥⲟⲩⲥ Ⲡⲓⲭ̀ⲣⲓⲥⲧⲟⲥ ⲉ̀ⲧⲁⲙⲉ ⲛⲉϥⲙⲁⲑⲏⲧⲏⲥ: ϫⲉ ϩⲱϯ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟϥ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉϥϣⲉⲛⲁϥ ⲉ̀Ⲓⲗ︦ⲏ︦ⲙ︦: ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉϥϭⲓ ⲟⲩⲙⲏϣ ⲛ̀ϧⲓⲥⲓ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ϩⲓⲧⲟⲧⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ⲛⲓⲡ̀ⲣⲉⲥⲃⲩⲧⲉⲣⲟⲥ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲛⲓⲁⲣⲭⲏⲉ̀ⲣⲉⲩⲥ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲛⲓⲥⲁϧ: ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛ̀ⲥⲉϧⲟⲑⲃⲉϥ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲙⲉⲛⲉⲛⲥⲁ ⲅ︦ ⲛ̀ⲉ̀ϩⲟⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉϥⲧⲱⲛϥ.
21 مِنْ ذَلِكَ الوَقْتِ ابْتَدَأَ يَسُوعُ الْمَسِيحُ يُخْبِرُ تَلَامِيذَهُ أَنَّهُ يَنْبَغِي أَنْ يَذْهَبَ إِلَى أُورُشَلِيمَ وَيَتألَّمَ كَثِيرًا مِنَ الشُّيُوخِ وَرُؤَسَاءِ الكَهَنَةِ وَالكَتَبَةِ، وَيُقْتَلَ، وَبَعدَ ثَلَاثَةِ أيَّامٍ يَقُومُ.
22 Then Peter took Him aside and began to rebuke Him, saying, “Far be it from You, Lord; this shall not happen to You!”
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ϥⲁ̀ⲙⲟⲛⲓ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟϥ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ Ⲡⲉⲧⲣⲟⲥ ⲁϥⲉⲣϩⲏⲧⲥ ⲛ̀ⲉⲣⲉ̀ⲡⲓⲧⲓⲙⲁⲛ ⲛⲁϥ ⲉϥϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ϫⲉ ⲉ̀ⲗⲉⲱⲥ ⲛⲁⲕ Ⲡⲁⲟ︦ⲥ︦ ⲛ̀ⲛⲉ ⲫⲁⲓ ϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲕ.
22 فَأمَسَكَهُ بُطْرُسُ وَبَدأ يَنْتَهِرُهُ قَائِلًا: " حَاشَاكَ يَا رَبُّ أَنْ يَكُونَ لَكَ هذَا! "
23 But He turned and said to Peter, “Get behind Me, Satan! You are an offense to Me, for you are not mindful of the things of God, but the things of men.”
Ⲛ̀ⲑⲟϥ ⲇⲉ ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ⲙ̀Ⲡⲉⲧⲣⲟⲥ ϫⲉ ⲙⲁϣⲉⲛⲁⲕ ⲥⲁⲙⲉⲛϩⲏⲓ ⲡ̀ⲥⲁⲧⲁⲛⲁⲥ ϫⲉ ⲛ̀ⲑⲟⲕ ⲟⲩⲥ̀ⲕⲁⲛⲇⲁⲗⲟⲛ ⲛⲏⲓ ϫⲉ ⲭ̀ⲙⲉⲩⲓ ⲁⲛ ⲉ̀ⲛⲁ Ⲫϯ ⲁⲗⲗⲁ ⲛⲁ ⲛⲓⲣⲱⲙⲓ.
23 فَقَالَ لِبُطْرُسَ: " اذْهَبْ عَنِّي يَا شَيْطَانُ! فَإِنَّكَ مَعْثَرَةٌ لِي، لِأَنَّكَ لَا تَفْتَكِرُ فِيمَا للَّهِ بَلْ فِيمَا لِلنَّاسِ ".
24 Then Jesus said to His disciples, “If anyone desires to come after Me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow Me.
Ⲧⲟⲧⲉ ⲡⲉϫⲉ Ⲓⲏ︦ⲥ︦ ⲛ̀ⲛⲉϥⲙⲁⲑⲏⲧⲏⲥ ϫⲉ ⲫⲏⲉⲑⲟⲩⲱϣ ⲉ̀ⲙⲟϣⲓ ⲛ̀ⲥⲱⲓ ⲙⲁⲣⲉϥϫⲟⲗϥ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲙⲁⲣⲉϥⲱ̀ⲗⲓ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉϥⲥ̀ⲧⲁⲩⲣⲟⲥ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉϥⲙⲟϣⲓ ⲛ̀ⲥⲱⲓ.
24 حِينَئِذٍ قَالَ يَسُوعُ لِتَلَامِيذِهِ: " مَنْ أَرَادَ أَنْ يَتْبَعَنِي فَلْيُنْكِرْ نَفْسَهُ وَيَحْمِلْ صَلِيبَهُ وَيَتْبَعْنِي،
25 For whoever desires to save his life will lose it, but whoever loses his life for My sake will find it.
Ⲫⲏ ⲅⲁⲣ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲱϣ ⲉ̀ⲛⲟϩⲉⲙ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉϥⲯⲩⲭⲏ ⲉϥⲉ̀ⲧⲁⲕⲟⲥ ⲫⲏ ⲇⲉ ⲉⲑⲛⲁⲧⲁⲕⲟ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉϥⲯⲩⲭⲏ ⲉⲑⲃⲏⲧ ⲉϥⲉ̀ϫⲉⲙⲥ.
25 لِأَنَّ مَنْ أَرَادَ أَنْ يُخَلِّصَ نَفْسَهُ يُهْلِكُهَا، وَمَنْ يُهْلِكُ نَفْسَهُ مِنْ أَجْلِي يَجِدُهَا.
26 For what profit is it to a man if he gains the whole world, and loses his own soul? Or what will a man give in exchange for his soul?
Ⲟⲩ ⲅⲁⲣ ⲉ̀ⲧⲉ ⲡⲓⲣⲱⲙⲓ ⲛⲁϫⲉⲙϩⲏⲟⲩ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟϥ ⲁϥϣⲁⲛϫⲉⲙϩⲏⲟⲩ ⲙ̀ⲡⲓⲕⲟⲥⲙⲟⲥ ⲧⲏⲣϥ ⲧⲉϥⲯⲩⲭⲏ ⲇⲉ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉϥϯⲟ̀ⲥⲓ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲛ ⲟⲩ ⲡⲉⲧⲉ ⲡⲓⲣⲱⲙⲓ ⲛⲁⲧⲏⲓϥ ⲛ̀ⲧ̀ϣⲉⲃⲓⲱ̀ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉϥⲯⲩⲭⲏ.
26 لِأَنَّهُ مَاذا يَنْتَفِعُ الْإِنْسَانُ لَوْ رَبِحَ الْعَالَمَ كُلَّهُ وَخَسِرَ نَفْسَهُ؟ أوْ مَاذا يُعْطِي الْإِنْسَانُ فِدَاءً عَنْ نَفْسِهِ؟ ".