Stand in the fear of God and listen to the Holy Gospel. A reading from the Gospel according to our teacher Saint Mark the Evangelist, and the pure disciple. May his blessings be with us all.
قِفُوا بِخَوْفِ اللهِ، وَأَنْصِتُوا لِسَمَاعِ الإِنْجِيلِ الْمُقَدَّسِ. فَصْلٌ مِنْ بِشَارَةِ الإِنْجِيلِ لِمُعَلِّمِنَا مَارْ مرقس الْبَشِيرِ، التِّلْمِيذِ الطَّاهِرِ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
From the Psalms of our teacher David the prophet. May his blessings be with us all.
مِنْ مَزَامِيرِ تَرَاتِيلِ مُعَلِّمِنَا دَاوُدَ النَّبِيِّ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
Matins Psalm
المزمور
	Psalms 85:8, 9
(مزامير 85: 8, 9)
All nations whom You have made Shall come and worship before You, O Lord, And shall glorify Your name. For You alone are The Great God.
Ⲛⲓⲉⲑⲛⲟⲥ ⲧⲏⲣⲟⲩ ⲉ̀ⲧⲁⲕ ⲑⲟⲙⲓⲱⲟ̀ⲩ: ⲉⲩⲉ̀ⲓ̀ ⲉⲩⲉ̀ⲟⲩⲱϣⲧ ⲙ̀ⲉⲡⲕⲙ̀ⲑⲟ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ Ⲡⲟ︦ⲥ︦: ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉⲩⲉ̀ϯⲱⲟ̀ⲩ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉⲕⲣⲁⲛ: ϫⲉ ⲛ̀ⲑⲟⲕ ⲙ̀ⲙⲁⲩⲁⲧⲕ ⲉⲧⲟⲓ ⲛ̀ⲛⲓϣϯ: ⲁ︦ⲗ︦.
كُلُّ الْأُمَمِ الَّذِينَ خَلَقْتَهُمْ، يَأْتُونَ وَيَسْجُدُونَ أَمَامَكَ يَا رَبُّ، وَيُمَجِّدُونَ اسْمَكَ. لِأَنَّكَ أَنْتَ وَحْدَكَ الْإِلَهُ الْعَظِيمُ.
People:
Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
الليلويا.
	Psalm Trailer for the Pope or a Bishop
(Ⲙⲁⲣⲟⲩϭⲁⲥϥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲧ̀ⲉⲕⲕ̀ⲗⲏⲥⲓⲁ̀...)
People:
Amen Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲙⲏⲛ Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
امين الليلويا.
Then the introduction to the Gospel is read.
ثم تقال مقدمة الأنجيل وهي:
Reader:
Blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord. Our Lord, God, Savior and King of us all, Jesus Christ, Son of the living God to whom is glory forever. Amen.
القارﺉُ:
مباركٌ الآتي باسمِ الربِّ إلهِ القواتِ، ربُّنا وإلهُنا ومخلصُنا وملكُنا كلِّنا، يسوعُ المسيحُ، ابنُ اللهِ الحيِّ، الذي لهُ المجدُ إلى الأبدِ. آمين.
Matins Gospel
الإنجيل
	Mark 12:28-34
(مرقس 12: 28-34)
28 Then one of the scribes came, and having heard them reasoning together, perceiving that He had answered them well, asked Him, “Which is the first commandment of all?”
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁϥⲓ̀ ϩⲁⲣⲟϥ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲟⲩⲁⲓ ⲛ̀ⲛⲓⲥⲁϧⲉ̀ⲧⲁϥⲥⲱⲧⲉⲙ ⲉ̀ⲣⲱⲟⲩ ⲉⲩⲕⲱϯ ⲉϥⲉ̀ⲙⲓ ϫⲉ ⲕⲁⲗⲱⲥ ⲁϥⲉ̀ⲣⲟⲩⲱ̀ ⲛⲱⲟⲩ ⲁϥϣⲉⲛϥ ϫⲉ ⲁϣ ⲧⲉ ϯⲉⲛⲧⲟⲗⲏ ⲉⲧⲟⲓ ⲛ̀ϣⲟⲣⲡ ⲉ̀ⲣⲱⲟⲩ ⲧⲏⲣⲟⲩ.
28 فَجَاءَ وَاحِدٌ مِنَ الْكَتَبَةِ وَسَمِعَهُمْ يُبَاحِثُونَهُ، وَرَأَى أَنَّهُ أَجَابَهُمْ حَسَنًا، فَسَأَلَهُ: " أَيَّةُ وَصِيَّةٍ هِيَ أَوَّلُ الْكُلِّ؟ ".
29 Jesus answered him, “The first of all the commandments is: ‘Hear, O Israel, the Lord our God, the Lord is one.
Ⲁϥⲉ̀ⲣⲟⲩⲱ̀ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ Ⲓⲏ︦ⲥ︦ ϫⲉ ϯϣⲟⲣⲡ ⲧⲉ ⲑⲁⲓ ⲥⲱⲧⲉⲙ ⲡⲓⲥ︦ⲗ︦ Ⲡⲟ︦ⲥ︦ ⲡⲉⲕⲛⲟⲩϯ Ⲡⲟ︦ⲥ︦ ⲟⲩⲁⲓ ⲡⲉ.
29 أَجَابَهُ يَسُوعُ: " إِنَّ أَوَّلَ الْوَصَايَا كُلِّهَا هِيَ: اِسْمَعْ يَا إِسْرَائِيلُ. إِنَّ الرَّبَّ إِلَهَنَا رَبٌّ وَاحِدٌ.
30 And you shall love the Lord your God with all your heart, with all your soul, with all your mind, and with all your strength.’ This is the first commandment.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉⲕⲉ̀ⲙⲉⲛⲣⲉ Ⲡⲟ︦ⲥ︦ ⲡⲉⲕⲛⲟⲩϯ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗϧⲉⲛ ⲡⲉⲕϩⲏⲧ ⲧⲏⲣϥ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗϧⲉⲛ ⲧⲉⲕⲯⲩⲭⲏ ⲧⲏⲣⲥ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗϧⲉⲛ ⲛⲉⲕⲙⲉⲩⲓ ⲧⲏⲣⲟⲩ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗϧⲉⲛ ⲧⲉⲕϫⲟⲙ ⲧⲏⲣⲥ.
30 فَأَحْبِبِ الرَّبَّ إِلَهَكَ مِنْ كُلِّ قَلْبِكَ، وَمِنْ كُلِّ نَفْسِكَ، وَمِنْ كُلِّ فِكْرِكَ، وَمِنْ كُلِّ قُدْرَتِكَ. هَذِهِ هِيَ الْوَصِيَّةُ الأُولَى.
31 And the second, like it, is this: ‘You shall love your neighbor as yourself.’ There is no other commandment greater than these.”
Ϯⲙⲁϩⲥ̀ⲛⲟⲩϯ ⲧⲉ ⲑⲁⲓ ⲉⲕⲉ̀ⲙⲉⲛⲣⲉ ⲡⲉⲕϣ̀ⲫⲏⲣ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉⲕⲣⲏϯ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲛ ⲕⲉⲉⲛⲧⲟⲗⲏ ⲉⲥⲟⲓ ⲛ̀ⲛⲓϣϯ ⲉ̀ⲛⲁⲓ.
31 وَالثَّانِيَةُ الَّتِي تُشْبِهُهَا هِيَ: أَحْبِبْ قَرِيبَكَ كَنَفْسِكَ. وَلَيْسَ وَصِيَّةٌ أُخْرَى أَعْظَمَ مِنْ هَاتَيْنِ ".
32 So the scribe said to Him, “Well said, Teacher. You have spoken the truth, for there is one God, and there is no other but He.
Ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ⲛⲁϥ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲡⲓⲥⲁϧ ϫⲉ ⲕⲁⲗⲱⲥ ⲡⲓⲣⲉϥϯⲥ̀ⲃⲱ ϧⲉⲛ ⲟⲩⲙⲉⲑⲙⲏⲓ ⲁⲕϫⲟⲥ ϫⲉ ⲟⲩⲁⲓ ⲡⲉ Ⲫϯ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲛ ⲕⲉⲟⲩⲁⲓ ⲉ̀ⲃⲏⲗ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟϥ.
32 فَقَالَ لَهُ الْكَاتِبُ: " حَسَنًا يَا مُعَلِّمُ. بِالْحَقِّ قُلْتَ، إِنَّ اللَّهَ وَاحِدٌ وَلَيْسَ آخرُ غَيْرَهُ.
33 And to love Him with all the heart, with all the understanding, with all the soul, and with all the strength, and to love one’s neighbor as oneself, is more than all the whole burnt offerings and sacrifices.”
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲡⲓⲙⲉⲛⲣⲓⲧϥ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗϧⲉⲛ ⲡⲉⲕϩⲏⲧ ⲧⲏⲣϥ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗϧⲉⲛ ⲧⲉⲕϫⲟⲙ ⲧⲏⲣⲥ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗϧⲉⲛ ⲡⲓⲕⲁϯ ⲧⲏⲣϥ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲡⲓⲙⲉⲛⲣⲉ ⲡⲉⲕϣ̀ⲫⲏⲣ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉⲕⲣⲏϯ ⲥⲉⲟⲓ ⲛ̀ⲛⲓϣϯ ⲉ̀ⲛⲓϭⲗⲓⲗ ⲧⲏⲣⲟⲩ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲛⲓϣⲟⲩϣⲱⲟⲩϣⲓ.
33 وَمَحَبَّتُهُ مِنْ كُلِّ الْقَلْبِ، وَكُلِّ الْعَقْلِ، وَكُلِّ النَّفْسِ، وَكُلِّ الْقُدْرَةِ، وَمَحَبَّةُ الْقَرِيبِ كَالنَّفْسِ، هُمَا أَفْضَلُ مِنْ جَمِيعِ الْمُحْرَقَاتِ وَالذَّبَائِحِ ".
34 Now when Jesus saw that he answered wisely, He said to him, “You are not far from the kingdom of God.” But after that no one dared question Him.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉ̀ⲧⲁϥⲛⲁⲩ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟϥ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ Ⲓⲏ︦ⲥ︦ ϫⲉ ⲁϥⲉ̀ⲣⲟⲩⲱ̀ ⲉ̀ⲟⲩⲟⲛ ϩⲏⲧ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟϥ ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ⲛⲁϥ ϫⲉ ⲭ̀ⲟⲩⲏ̀ⲟⲩ ⲁⲛ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗϩⲁ ϯⲙⲉⲧⲟⲩⲣⲟ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ Ⲫϯ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉ ϩ̀ⲗⲓ ϣ̀ⲉⲣⲧⲟⲗⲙⲁⲛ ⲉ̀ϣⲉⲛϥ.
34 فَلَمَّا رَآهُ يَسُوعُ أَنَّهُ أَجَابَ بِحِكْمَةٍ، قَالَ لَهُ: " لَسْتَ بَعِيدًا مِنْ مَلَكُوتِ اللَّهِ ". وَلَمْ يَجْسُرْ أَحَدٌ بَعْدَهَا أَنْ يَسْأَلَهُ.