Prophecies
النبوآت
	Isaiah 2:11-19
(اشعياء 2: 11-19)
A reading from Isaiah, the prophet. May his holy blessings be with us. Amen.
Ⲉⲃⲟⲗϧⲉⲛ Ⲏⲥⲁⲏ̀ⲁⲥ ⲡⲓⲡ̀ⲣⲟⲫⲏⲧⲏⲥ: ⲉ̀ⲣⲉⲡⲉϥⲥ̀ⲙⲟⲩ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ ϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲛⲉⲙⲁⲛ ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ ⲉϥϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ:
من اشعياء النبي بركته المقدسة تكون معنا. آمين.
11 And the Lord alone shall be exalted in that day.
11 وَيَتَعَالَى الرَّبُّ وَحْدَهُ فِي ذَلِكَ الْيَوْمِ.
12 For the day of the Lord of hosts Shall come upon everything proud and lofty, Upon everything lifted up— And it shall be brought low—
12 لِأَنَّ يَوْمَ رَبِّ الْجُنُودِ سَيَأْتي عَلَى كُلِّ مُتعَدٍّ ومُتَعَظِّمٍ، وَعَلَى كُلِّ مَنِ اسْتَعْلَى وتَشَامَخَ فَيُذلُّونَ،
13 Upon all the cedars of Lebanon that are high and lifted up, And upon all the oaks of Bashan;
13 وَعَلَى كُلِّ أَرْزِ لُبْنَانَ المُتعَالِي الشَّامِخِ، وَعَلَى كُلِّ شَجرِ بَلُّوطِ بَاشَانَ،
14 Upon all the high mountains, And upon all the hills that are lifted up;
14 وَعَلَى كُلِّ جَبلٍ عَالٍ، وَعَلَى كُلِّ أَكمَةٍ مُرتَفِعةٍ،
15 Upon every high tower, And upon every fortified wall;
15 وَعَلَى كُلِّ بُرْجٍ شَاهقٍ، وَعَلَى كُلِّ سُورٍ مَنِيعٍ،
16 Upon all the ships of Tarshish, And upon all the beautiful sloops.
16 وَعَلَى كُلِّ سُفُنِ الْبَحرِ، وَعَلَى كُلِّ مَنْظَرِ سُفنِ الْبَحرِ الْحَسَنةِ.
17 The loftiness of man shall be bowed down, And the haughtiness of men shall be brought low; The Lord alone will be exalted in that day,
17 ويُذَلُّ كُلُّ إِنْسانٍ، ويَسقُطُ ارْتِفَاعُ الْبَشَرِ، وَيَتَعَالَى الرَّبُّ وَحْدَهُ فِي ذَلِكَ الْيَوْمِ.
18 But the idols He shall utterly abolish.
18 وَيُخْفُونَ جَمِيعَ عَمَلِ أَيْدِيهِمْ،
19 They shall go into the holes of the rocks, And into the caves of the earth, From the terror of the Lord And the glory of His majesty, When He arises to shake the earth mightily.
19 وَيَحْمِلُونَهُ إِلَى الْمَغَاوِرِ، وَشُقُوقِ الصُّخُورِ، وَفِي ثُقُوبِ الْأَرْضِ مِنْ أَمَامِ صَوْتِ الرَّبِّ، وَمِنْ مَجْدِ قُوَّتِهِ، إِذَا قَامَ لِيُهَشِّمَ الْأَرْضَ.
Glory be to the Holy Trinity, our God, forever and unto the ages of all ages. Amen.
Ⲟⲩⲱ̀ⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ϯⲧ̀ⲣⲓⲁⲥ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ Ⲡⲉⲛⲛⲟⲩϯ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛⲉⲙ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲛⲓⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲧⲏⲣⲟⲩ: ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ.
مجداً للثالوث القدوس إلهنا الى أبد الآبدين كلها آمين.
	Zechariah 8:18-23
(زكريا 8: 18-23)
A reading from Zechariah, the prophet. May his holy blessings be with us. Amen.
Ⲉⲃⲟⲗϧⲉⲛ Ⲍⲁⲭⲁⲣⲓⲁⲥ ⲡⲓⲡ̀ⲣⲟⲫⲏⲧⲏⲥ: ⲉ̀ⲣⲉⲡⲉϥⲥ̀ⲙⲟⲩ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ ϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲛⲉⲙⲁⲛ ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ ⲉϥϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ:
من زكريا النبي بركته المقدسة تكون معنا. آمين.
18 Then the word of the Lord of hosts came to me, saying,
18 وَكَانَتْ إِلَيَّ كَلِمَةُ رَبِّ الْجُنُودِ قَائِلًا:
19 “Thus says the Lord of hosts: ‘The fast of the fourth month, The fast of the fifth, The fast of the seventh, And the fast of the tenth, Shall be joy and gladness and cheerful feasts For the house of Judah. Therefore love truth and peace.’
19 " هَكَذَا قَالَ الرَّبُّ الضَّابِطُ الْكُلَّ: إِنَّ صَوْمَ الشَّهْرِ الرَّابِعِ وَصَوْمَ الْخَامِسِ وَصَوْمَ السَّابعِ وَصَوْمَ الْعَاشِرِ سَيَكُونُ لِبَيْتِ يَهُوذَا سُرُورًا وَفَرَحًا وَأَعْيَادًا طَيِّبَةً. فَأَحِبُّوا الْحَقَّ وَالسَّلَامَ ".
20 “Thus says the Lord of hosts: ‘Peoples shall yet come, Inhabitants of many cities;
20 هَكَذَا قَالَ رَبُّ الْجُنُودِ: سَيَأْتِي شُعُوبٌ أَيْضًا، وَسُكَّانُ مُدُنٍ كَثِيرَةٍ تَجْتَمِعُ.
21 The inhabitants of one city shall go to another, saying, “Let us continue to go and pray before the Lord, And seek the Lord of hosts. I myself will go also.”
21 تَجْتَمِعُ سُكَّانُ خَمْسَةِ مُدُنٍ وَيَأْتُونَ إِلَى مَدِينَةٍ وَاحِدَةٍ قَائِلِينَ: لِنَسِرْ سَيْرًا لِاسْتِعْطَافِ وَجْهِ الرَّبِّ وَالْتِمَاسِ رَبِّ الْجُنُودِ، وَأَنَا أَيْضًا أَسِيرُ.
22 Yes, many peoples and strong nations Shall come to seek the Lord of hosts in Jerusalem, And to pray before the Lord.’
22 فَيَأْتِي شُعُوبٌ كَثِيرُونَ وَأُمَمٌ أَقْويَاءُ لِالْتِمَاسِ رَبِّ الْجُنُودِ فِي أُورُشَلِيمَ، وَاسْتِعْطَافِ وَجْهِ الرَّبِّ.
23 “Thus says the Lord of hosts: ‘In those days ten men from every language of the nations shall grasp the sleeve of a Jewish man, saying, “Let us go with you, for we have heard that God is with you.”’”
23 " هَكَذَا قَالَ رَبُّ الْجُنُودِ: إِنَّهُ فِي تِلْكَ الْأَيَّامِ سَيَتَمَسَّكُ عَشَرَةُ رِجَالٍ مِنْ جَمِيعِ أَلْسِنَةِ الْأُمَمِ بِذَيْلِ إِنْسَانٍ يَهودِيٍّ قَائِلِينَ: إِنَّنَا نَسِيرُ مَعَكُمْ فَقَدْ سَمِعْنَا أَنَّ اللَّهَ مَعَكُمْ ".
Glory be to the Holy Trinity, our God, forever and unto the ages of all ages. Amen.
Ⲟⲩⲱ̀ⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ϯⲧ̀ⲣⲓⲁⲥ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ Ⲡⲉⲛⲛⲟⲩϯ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛⲉⲙ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲛⲓⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲧⲏⲣⲟⲩ: ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ.
مجداً للثالوث القدوس إلهنا الى أبد الآبدين كلها آمين.