Stand in the fear of God and listen to the Holy Gospel. A reading from the Gospel according to our teacher Saint Luke the Evangelist, and the pure disciple. May his blessings be with us all.
قِفُوا بِخَوْفِ اللهِ، وَأَنْصِتُوا لِسَمَاعِ الإِنْجِيلِ الْمُقَدَّسِ. فَصْلٌ مِنْ بِشَارَةِ الإِنْجِيلِ لِمُعَلِّمِنَا مَارْ لوقا الْبَشِيرِ، التِّلْمِيذِ الطَّاهِرِ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
From the Psalms of our teacher David the prophet. May his blessings be with us all.
مِنْ مَزَامِيرِ تَرَاتِيلِ مُعَلِّمِنَا دَاوُدَ النَّبِيِّ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
Matins Psalm
المزمور
	Psalms 23:1-2
(مزامير 23: 1-2)
The earth is the Lord's, and all its fullness, The world and those who dwell therein. For He has founded it upon the seas, And established it upon the waters.
Ⲡⲓⲕⲁϩⲓ ⲫⲁ Ⲡ̀ⲟ︦ⲥ︦ ⲡⲉ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲡⲉϥϫⲱⲕ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ: ϯⲟⲓⲕⲟⲩⲙⲉⲛⲏ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲟⲩⲟⲛ ⲛⲓⲃⲉⲛ ⲉⲧϣⲟⲡ ⲛ̀ϧⲏⲧⲥ. Ⲛ̀ⲑⲟϥ ⲁϥϩⲓⲥⲉⲛϯ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ⲉ̀ϫⲉⲛ ⲛⲓⲁ̀ⲙⲁⲓⲟⲩ: ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁϥⲥⲉⲃⲧⲱⲧⲥ ⲉ̀ϫⲉⲛ ⲛⲓⲓⲁⲣⲱⲟⲩ. Ⲁ︦ⲗ︦.
لِلرَّبِّ الأَرْضُ وَمِلْؤُهَا. الْمَسْكُونَةُ وَجَمِيعُ السَّاكِنِينَ فِيهَا. هُوَ عَلَى الْبِحَارِ أَسَّسَهَا، وَعَلَى الأَنْهَارِ هَيَّأَهَا.
People:
Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
الليلويا.
	Psalm Trailer for the Pope or a Bishop
(Ⲙⲁⲣⲟⲩϭⲁⲥϥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲧ̀ⲉⲕⲕ̀ⲗⲏⲥⲓⲁ̀...)
People:
Amen Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲙⲏⲛ Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
امين الليلويا.
Then the introduction to the Gospel is read.
ثم تقال مقدمة الأنجيل وهي:
Reader:
Blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord. Our Lord, God, Savior and King of us all, Jesus Christ, Son of the living God to whom is glory forever. Amen.
القارﺉُ:
مباركٌ الآتي باسمِ الربِّ إلهِ القواتِ، ربُّنا وإلهُنا ومخلصُنا وملكُنا كلِّنا، يسوعُ المسيحُ، ابنُ اللهِ الحيِّ، الذي لهُ المجدُ إلى الأبدِ. آمين.
Matins Gospel
الإنجيل
	Luke 8:22-25
(لوقا 8: 22-25)
22 Now it happened, on a certain day, that He got into a boat with His disciples. And He said to them, “Let us cross over to the other side of the lake.” And they launched out.
Ⲁⲥϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲇⲉ ϧⲉⲛ ⲟⲩⲁⲓ ⲛ̀ⲛⲓⲉ̀ϩⲟⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ⲑⲟϥ ϥⲁ̀ⲗⲏⲓ ⲉ̀ⲟⲩϫⲟⲓ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲛⲉϥⲙⲁⲑⲏⲧⲏⲥ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ⲛⲱⲟⲩ ϫⲉ ⲙⲁⲣⲉⲛϣⲉ ⲛⲁⲛ ⲉ̀ⲙⲏⲣ ⲉ̀ϯⲗⲩⲙⲛⲏ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁⲩⲥⲱⲕ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ.
22 وَفِي أَحَدِ الْأَيَّامِ رَكِبَ سَفِينَةً هُوَ وَتَلَامِيذُهُ، وَقَالَ لَهُمْ: " لِنَمْضِ إِلَى عَبْرِ الْبُحَيْرَةِ ". فَأَقْلَعُوا.
23 But as they sailed He fell asleep. And a windstorm came down on the lake, and they were filling with water, and were in jeopardy.
Ⲉⲩⲉⲣϩⲱⲧ ⲇⲉ ϥⲉⲛⲕⲟⲧ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁϥⲓ̀ ⲉ̀ϧ̀ⲣⲏⲓ ⲉ̀ϯⲗⲩⲙⲛⲏ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲟⲩⲛⲓϣϯ ⲛ̀ⲑⲏⲟⲩ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛⲁϥⲕⲱϯ ⲉ̀ⲣⲱⲟⲩ ⲡⲉ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛⲁⲩⲉⲣⲕⲓⲛⲇⲩⲛⲉⲩⲓⲛ.
23 وَفِيمَا هُمْ سَائِرُونَ نَامَ. فَنَزَلَ عَلَى الْبُحَيْرَةِ عَاصِفَةُ رِيحٍ، فَامْتَلَأُوا مِنَ الْمَاءِ وَصَارُوا فِي خَطَرٍ.
24 And they came to Him and awoke Him, saying, “Master, Master, we are perishing!” Then He arose and rebuked the wind and the raging of the water. And they ceased, and there was a calm.
Ⲉⲧⲁⲩⲓ̀ ⲇⲉ ⲩⲛⲉϩⲥⲓ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟϥ ⲉⲩϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ϫⲉ ⲫ̀ⲣⲉϥϯⲥ̀ⲃⲱ ⲧⲉⲛⲛⲁⲧⲁⲕⲟ ⲛ̀ⲑⲟϥ ⲇⲉ ⲉⲧⲁϥⲧⲱⲛϥ ⲁϥⲉⲣⲉⲡⲓⲧⲓⲙⲁⲛ ⲙ̀ⲡⲓⲑⲏⲟⲩ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲛⲓϩⲱⲓⲙⲓ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲡⲓⲙⲱⲟⲩ ⲩⲟϩ ⲁⲩϩⲉⲣⲓ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁⲥϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲟⲩⲛⲓϣϯ ⲛ̀ϫⲁⲙⲏ.
24 فَدَنَوْا إِلَيْهِ وَأَيْقَظُوهُ قَائِلِيْنَ: " يَا مُعَلِّمُ، قَدْ هَلَكْنَا! ". فَقَامَ وَاِنْتَهَرَ الرِّيحَ وَتَمَوُّجَ الْمَاءِ، فَسَكَنَا وَحَدَثَ هُدُوءٌ.
25 But He said to them, “Where is your faith?” And they were afraid, and marveled, saying to one another, “Who can this be? For He commands even the winds and water, and they obey Him!”
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ⲛⲱⲟⲩ ϫⲉ ⲁϥⲑⲱⲛ ⲡⲉⲧⲉⲛⲛⲁϩϯ ⲛ̀ⲑⲱⲟⲩ ⲇⲉ ⲉⲧⲁⲩⲉⲣϩⲟϯ ⲩⲉⲣϣ̀ⲫⲏ ⲣⲓ ⲉⲩϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ⲛ̀ⲛⲟⲩⲉⲣⲏⲟⲩ ϫⲉ ⲛⲓⲙ ϩⲁⲣⲁ ⲡⲉ ⲫⲁⲓ ϫⲉ ϥ̀ⲟⲩⲁϩⲥⲁϩⲛⲓ ⲛ̀ⲛⲓⲕⲉⲑⲏⲟⲩ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲛⲓⲙⲱⲟⲩ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲥⲉⲥⲱⲧⲉⲙ ⲛⲁϥ.
25 ثُمَّ قَالَ لَهُمْ: " أَيْنَ إِيمَانُكُمْ؟ ". فَخَافُوا وَتَعَجَّبُوا وَقَالَ بَعْضُهُمْ لِبَعْضٍ: " مَنْ تُرَى هَذَا؟ فَإِنَّهُ يَأْمُرُ الرِّيَاحَ وَالْبَحْرَ فَتُطِيعُهُ! ".