Prophecies
النبوآت
	Job 19:1-27
(ايوب 19: 1-27)
A reading from Job the righteous. May his holy blessings be with us. Amen.
Ⲉⲃⲟⲗϧⲉⲛ Ⲓⲱⲃ Ⲡⲓⲑ̀ⲙⲏⲓ: ⲉ̀ⲣⲉⲡⲉϥⲥ̀ⲙⲟⲩ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ ϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲛⲉⲙⲁⲛ ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ ⲉϥϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ:
من ايوب الصديق بركته المقدسة تكون معنا. آمين.
1 Then Job answered and said:
1 فَأَجَابَ أَيُّوبُ وَقَالَ:
2 “How long will you torment my soul, And break me in pieces with words?
2 إِلَى مَتَى تُمَرْمِرُونَ نَفْسِي وَتُوجِعُونَنِي بِالْكَلَامِ؟
3 These ten times you have reproached me; You are not ashamed that you have wronged me.
3 اِعْلَمُوا أَنَّ الرَّبَّ فَعَلَ بِي هَذَا. هَذِهِ عَشْرُ مَرَّاتٍ عَيَّرْتُمُونِي، وَلَا تَخْجَلُونَ مِنْ أَنْ تَتَوَهَّقُونِي.
4 And if indeed I have erred, My error remains with me.
4 وهَبُونِي فِي الْواقِعِ قَدْ ضَلَلْتُ حَقًّا، فَإِلَيَّ تَنْتَهِي ضَلَالَتِي.
5 If indeed you exalt yourselves against me, And plead my disgrace against me,
5 إِنْ كُنْتُمْ بِالْحَقِّ تَعْظُمُونَ عَلَيَّ، فَثَبِّتُوا عَلَيَّ عَارِي؟
6 Know then that God has wronged me, And has surrounded me with His net.
6 فَاِعْلَمُوا أَيْضًا أَنَّ اللَّهَ هُوَ الَّذِي أَبْلَانِي، وَهُوَ الَّذِي رَفَعَ قُوَّتَهُ عَلَيَّ.
7 “If I cry out concerning wrong, I am not heard. If I cry aloud, there is no justice.
7 هَا إِنِّي أَصْرُخُ ظُلْمًا فَلَا أُسْتَجَابُ، وَأَسْتَغِيثُ وَلَيْسَ مِنْ قَضَاءٍ.
8 He has fenced up my way, so that I cannot pass; And He has set darkness in my paths.
8 قَدْ سَيَّجَ عَلَيَّ طَرِيقِي فَلَا أَجُوْزَ، وَعَلَى وَجْهِي جَعَلَ ظَلامًا.
9 He has stripped me of my glory, And taken the crown from my head.
9 عَرَّانِي مِنْ مَجْدِي، وَنَزَعَ التَّاجَ عَنْ رَأْسِي.
10 He breaks me down on every side, And I am gone; My hope He has uprooted like a tree.
10 هَدَّمَنِي مِنْ كُلِّ جِهَةٍ فَسَقَطْتُ، وَاسْتَأْصَلَ رَجَائِيِ مِثْلَ الشَّجَرَةِ.
11 He has also kindled His wrath against me, And He counts me as one of His enemies.
11 وَأَضْرَمَ عَلَيَّ غَضَبَهُ، وَاعْتَدَّنِي بِمَنْزِلَةِ الْعَدُوِّ.
12 His troops come together And build up their road against me; They encamp all around my tent.
12 زَخَفَ غُزَاتُهُ زَحْفَةً وَاحِدَةً. مَهَّدُوا عَلَيَّ طَرِيقَهُمْ، وَنَزَلُوا حَوْلَ خَيْمَتِي.
13 “He has removed my brothers far from me, And my acquaintances are completely estranged from me.
13 قَدِ اِبْتَعَدَ عَنِّي إخْوَانِـي، وَاعْتَزَلَتْنِي مَعَارِفِي.
14 My relatives have failed, And my close friends have forgotten me.
14 خَذَلَنِي ذوُو قَرَابَتِي، وَالَّذِينَ عَرَفُونِي نَسُونِي.
15 Those who dwell in my house, and my maidservants, Count me as a stranger; I am an alien in their sight.
15 حَسِبَنِي أَهْلُ بَيْتِي وَإِمَائِي غَرِيبًا، وَأَصبَحْتُ أَجْنَبِيًّا فِي أَعْيُنِهِمْ.
16 I call my servant, but he gives no answer; I beg him with my mouth.
16 دَعَوْتُ عَبْدِي فَلَمْ يُجِبْ، وَبِفَمِيِ تَضَرَّعْتُ إِلَيْهِ.
17 My breath is offensive to my wife, And I am repulsive to the children of my own body.
17 كَرَهَتْ اِمْرَأَتِي لُهَاثَ فَمِي، وَغَدَوْتُ أَبْتَهِلُ إِلَى أَبْنَاءِ أَحْشَائِي،
18 Even young children despise me; I arise, and they speak against me.
18 حَتَّى الصِّبْيَانُ ازْدَرُونِـي، إِذَا قُمْتُ يَتَكَلَّمُونَ عَلَيَّ.
19 All my close friends abhor me, And those whom I love have turned against me.
19 قَدْ مَقَتَنِي أُمَنَاءُ سِرِّي، وَالَّذِينَ أَحْبَبْتُهُمُ اِنْقَلَبُوا عَلَيَّ.
20 My bone clings to my skin and to my flesh, And I have escaped by the skin of my teeth.
20 لَصِقَتْ عِظَامِي بِجِلْدِي وَلَحْمِي، وَنَجَوْتُ بِجِلْدِ أَسْنَانِي.
21 “Have pity on me, have pity on me, O you my friends, For the hand of God has struck me!
21 اِرْحَمُونِـي، اِرْحَمُونِـي يَا أَصْدِقَائِي؛ لِأَنَّ يَدَ اللَّهِ قَدْ مَسَّتْنِي.
22 Why do you persecute me as God does, And are not satisfied with my flesh?
22 لِمَا تُطَارِدُونَنِي مِثْلَ اللَّهِ، وَلَا تَشْبَعُونَ مِنْ لَحْمِي؟
23 “Oh, that my words were written! Oh, that they were inscribed in a book!
23 مَنْ لِي بِأَنْ تُكْتَبَ أَقْوالِـي، وَمَنْ لِي بِأَنْ تُحْفَرَ فِي سِفْرٍ،
24 That they were engraved on a rock With an iron pen and lead, forever!
24 بِقَلَمٍ مِنْ حَدِيدٍ عَلَى الرَّصَاصِ، أَنْ تُنْقَشَ فِي الصَّخْرِ إِلَى الْأَبَدِ؟
25 For I know that my Redeemer lives, And He shall stand at last on the earth;
25 أَمَّا أَنَا فَإِنِّي أَعْلَمُ بِأَنَّ فَادِيَّ حَيٌّ، وَسَيَقُومُ آخِرًا عَلَى الْأَرْضِ.
26 And after my skin is destroyed, this I know, That in my flesh I shall see God,
26 وَبَعْدَ أَنْ يَفْنَى جِلْدِي هَذَا، وَبِدُونِ جَسَدِي أَرَى اللَّهَ،
27 Whom I shall see for myself, And my eyes shall behold, and not another. How my heart yearns within me!
27 الَّذِي أَنَا أُعَايِنُهُ بِنَفْسِي، وَعَيْنَايَ تَرَيَانِهِ لَا غَيْرِي، قَدْ فَنِيَتْ كُلْيَتَايَ شَوْقًا فِي دَاخِلِـي.
Glory be to the Holy Trinity, our God, forever and unto the ages of all ages. Amen.
Ⲟⲩⲱ̀ⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ϯⲧ̀ⲣⲓⲁⲥ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ Ⲡⲉⲛⲛⲟⲩϯ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛⲉⲙ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲛⲓⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲧⲏⲣⲟⲩ: ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ.
مجداً للثالوث القدوس إلهنا الى أبد الآبدين كلها آمين.
	Isaiah 5:7-16
(اشعياء 5: 7-16)
A reading from Isaiah, the prophet. May his holy blessings be with us. Amen.
Ⲉⲃⲟⲗϧⲉⲛ Ⲏⲥⲁⲏ̀ⲁⲥ ⲡⲓⲡ̀ⲣⲟⲫⲏⲧⲏⲥ: ⲉ̀ⲣⲉⲡⲉϥⲥ̀ⲙⲟⲩ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ ϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲛⲉⲙⲁⲛ ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ ⲉϥϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ:
من اشعياء النبي بركته المقدسة تكون معنا. آمين.
7 For the vineyard of the Lord of hosts is the house of Israel, And the men of Judah are His pleasant plant. He looked for justice, but behold, oppression; For righteousness, but behold, a cry for help.
7 إِنَّ كَرْمَ رَبِّ الْجُنُودِ هُوَ بَيْتُ إِسْرَائِيلَ، وَرِجَالُ يَهُوذَا الْغَرْسُ الْجَدِيدُ الْمَحْبُوبُ، وَقَدِ اِنْتَظَرْتُ الْإِنْصَافَ فِي الْقَضَاءِ فَإِذَا سَفْكُ الدِّمَاءِ، وَالْعَدْلَ فَإِذَا الصُّرَاخُ.
8 Woe to those who join house to house; They add field to field, Till there is no place Where they may dwell alone in the midst of the land!
8 وَيْلٌ لِلَّذِيْنَ يَصِلُونَ بَيْتًا بِبَيْتٍ، وَيَقْرِنُونَ حَقْلًا بِحَقْلٍ، لِيَأْخُذُوا بِلَادَ أَصْحَابِهِمْ، هَلْ أَنْتُمْ تَسْكُنُونَ هُنَاكَ فِي الْأَرْضِ وَحْدَكُمْ؟
9 In my hearing the Lord of hosts said, “Truly, many houses shall be desolate, Great and beautiful ones, without inhabitant.
9 قَدْ بَلَغَ هَذَا فِي أُذُنَيَّ رَبِّ الصَّبَاؤُوتِ. أَلَا إِنَّ بُيُوتًا كَثِيرَةً سَتُخْرَبُ، بُيُوتًا كَبِيرَةً وَحَسَنَةً بِلَا سَاكِنٍ.
10 For ten acres of vineyard shall yield one bath, And a homer of seed shall yield one ephah.”
10 فَإِنَّ عَشَرَةَ فَدَادِينَ لَا تَعْصُرُ إِلَّا أَجَانَةً وَاحِدَةً، وَيُبْذَرُ ثُلْثَيْنِ مَدًّا فَلَا يُؤْخَذُ إِلَّا ثَلاثَةٌ.
11 Woe to those who rise early in the morning, That they may follow intoxicating drink; Who continue until night, till wine inflames them!
11 وَيْلٌ لِلْمُبَكِّرِينَ صَبَاحًا فِي طَلَبِ الْمُسْكِرِ، الْمُسْتَمِرِّينَ فِي شُربِهِ حَتَّى الْمَسَاءِ وَالْخَمْرُ تُلْهِبُهُمْ.
12 The harp and the strings, The tambourine and flute, And wine are in their feasts; But they do not regard the work of the Lord, Nor consider the operation of His hands.
12 وَصَارَ القِيثَارُ وَالْمِزْمَارُ وَالدُّفُّ وَالنَّايُ وَشُرْبِ الْخَمْرِ وَلَائِمَهُمْ، وَإِلَى أَعْمَالِ الرَّبِّ لَا يَنْظُرُونَ، وَعَمَلَ يَدَيْهِ لَا يَتَأَمَّلُونَ.
13 Therefore my people have gone into captivity, Because they have no knowledge; Their honorable men are famished, And their multitude dried up with thirst.
13 لِذَلِكَ سُبِيَ شَعْبِي لِعَدَمِ مَعْرِفَتِهِ الرَّبَّ، وَكَثُرَ مَوْتَاهُمْ مِنْ الْجُوعِ وَالْعَطَشِ.
14 Therefore Sheol has enlarged itself And opened its mouth beyond measure; Their glory and their multitude and their pomp, And he who is jubilant, shall descend into it.
14 لِذَلِكَ وَسَّعَتِ الْهَاوِيَةُ نَفْسَهَا، وَفَغَرَتْ فَاهَا بِلا حَدٍّ، فَيَنْحَدِرُ فِيهَا الْوُجَهَاءُ وَالْأَعِزَّاءُ وَالْكِرَامُ،
15 People shall be brought down, Each man shall be humbled, And the eyes of the lofty shall be humbled.
15 وَيُذَلُّ الْإِنْسَانُ وَيُهَانُ الرَّجُلُ، وَالْأَعْيُنُ الْمُتَعَالِيَةُ تُوضَعُ.
16 But the Lord of hosts shall be exalted in judgment, And God who is holy shall be hallowed in righteousness.
16 وَيَتَعَالَى رَبُّ الْجُنُودِ بِالْحُكْمِ، وَيَتَمَجَّدُ الْإِلَهُ الْقُدُّوسُ بِالْمَجْدِ.
Glory be to the Holy Trinity, our God, forever and unto the ages of all ages. Amen.
Ⲟⲩⲱ̀ⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ϯⲧ̀ⲣⲓⲁⲥ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ Ⲡⲉⲛⲛⲟⲩϯ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛⲉⲙ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲛⲓⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲧⲏⲣⲟⲩ: ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ.
مجداً للثالوث القدوس إلهنا الى أبد الآبدين كلها آمين.