Stand in the fear of God and listen to the Holy Gospel. A reading from the Gospel according to our teacher Saint Luke the Evangelist, and the pure disciple. May his blessings be with us all.
قِفُوا بِخَوْفِ اللهِ، وَأَنْصِتُوا لِسَمَاعِ الإِنْجِيلِ الْمُقَدَّسِ. فَصْلٌ مِنْ بِشَارَةِ الإِنْجِيلِ لِمُعَلِّمِنَا مَارْ لوقا الْبَشِيرِ، التِّلْمِيذِ الطَّاهِرِ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
From the Psalms of our teacher David the prophet. May his blessings be with us all.
مِنْ مَزَامِيرِ تَرَاتِيلِ مُعَلِّمِنَا دَاوُدَ النَّبِيِّ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
Matins Psalm
المزمور
	Psalms 54:1, 26:11
(مزامير 54: 1, 26: 11)
Hearken to my prayer, O God, and do not hide Yourself from my supplication. Pity me, and hearken to me. My heart said to You.
Ϭⲓⲥ̀ⲙⲓ Ⲫϯ ⲉ̀ⲧⲁⲡ̀ⲣⲟⲥⲉⲩⲭⲏ: ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉⲣϩⲓⲡ̀ϩⲟ ⲙ̀ⲡⲁⲧⲱⲃϩ: ⲙⲁϩ̀ⲑⲏⲕ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟⲓ: ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲥⲱⲧⲉⲙ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟⲓ: ϫⲉ ⲛ̀ⲑⲟⲕ ⲡⲉ ⲉ̀ⲧⲁ ⲡⲁϩⲏⲧ ϫⲟⲥ ⲛⲁⲕ: ⲁ︦ⲗ︦.
أَنْصِتْ يَا أللَّهُ لِصَلَاتِي، وَلَا تَغْفَلْ عَنْ تَضَرُّعِي. اِرْحَمْنِي واسْتَجِبْ لِي، فَإِنَّ لَكَ قَالَ قَلْبِي.
People:
Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
الليلويا.
	Psalm Trailer for the Pope or a Bishop
(Ⲙⲁⲣⲟⲩϭⲁⲥϥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲧ̀ⲉⲕⲕ̀ⲗⲏⲥⲓⲁ̀...)
People:
Amen Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲙⲏⲛ Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
امين الليلويا.
Then the introduction to the Gospel is read.
ثم تقال مقدمة الأنجيل وهي:
Reader:
Blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord. Our Lord, God, Savior and King of us all, Jesus Christ, Son of the living God to whom is glory forever. Amen.
القارﺉُ:
مباركٌ الآتي باسمِ الربِّ إلهِ القواتِ، ربُّنا وإلهُنا ومخلصُنا وملكُنا كلِّنا، يسوعُ المسيحُ، ابنُ اللهِ الحيِّ، الذي لهُ المجدُ إلى الأبدِ. آمين.
Matins Gospel
الإنجيل
	Luke 14:7-15
(لوقا 14: 7-15)
7 So He told a parable to those who were invited, when He noted how they chose the best places, saying to them:
Ⲛⲁϥϫⲱ ⲇⲉ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩⲡⲁⲣⲁⲃⲟⲗⲏ ⲛ̀ⲛⲏⲉⲧⲑⲁϩⲉⲙ ⲉϥⲛⲁⲩ ϫⲉ ⲡⲱⲥ ⲛⲁⲩⲥⲱⲧⲡ ⲛⲱⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ⲛⲓϣⲟⲣⲡ ⲙ̀ⲙⲁⲛ̀ⲣⲱⲧⲉⲃ ϥϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ.
7 وَكَانَ يَقُولُ لِلْمَدْعُوِّينَ مَثَلًا، وَهُوَ يُلَاحِظُ كَيْفَ كَانُوا يَخْتَارُونَ الْمُتَّكَآتِ الْأُولَى قَائِلًا:
8 “When you are invited by anyone to a wedding feast, do not sit down in the best place, lest one more honorable than you be invited by him;
Ϫⲉ ϩⲟⲧⲁⲛ ⲁⲣⲉϣⲁⲛ ⲟⲩⲁⲓ ⲑⲁϩⲙⲉⲕ ⲉ̀ϩⲁⲛϩⲟⲡ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉⲣⲣⲱⲧⲉⲃ ⲉ̀ⲡⲓϣⲟⲣⲡ ⲙ̀ⲙⲁⲛ̀ⲣⲱⲧⲉⲃ ⲙⲏⲡⲱⲥ ⲁⲩⲑⲁϩⲉⲙ ⲕⲉⲟⲩⲁⲓ ϥⲧⲁⲓⲏ ⲟⲩⲧ ⲉϩⲟⲧⲉⲣⲟⲕ.
8 " مَتَى دَعَاكَ أَحَدٌ إِلَى عُرْسٍ فَلَا تَتَّكِئْ فِي الْمُتَّكَإِ الْأَوَّلِ، لِئَلَّا يَكُونَ وَاحِدٌ آخَرُ أَكْرَمُ مِنْكَ قَدْ دُعِيَ.
9 and he who invited you and him come and say to you, ‘Give place to this man,’ and then you begin with shame to take the lowest place.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉϥⲓ̀ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲫⲏⲉⲧⲁϥⲑⲁϩⲙⲉⲕ ⲛⲉⲙⲁϥ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉϥϫⲟⲥ ⲛⲁⲕ ϫⲉ ⲭⲁ ⲡⲓⲙⲁ ⲙ̀ⲫⲁⲓ ⲧⲟⲧⲉ ⲭⲛⲁⲉⲣϩⲏⲧⲥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲟⲩϣⲓⲡⲓ ⲉ̀ⲁ̀ⲙⲟⲛⲓ ⲙ̀ⲡⲓϧⲁⲉ̀ ⲙ̀ⲙⲁ.
9 فَيَأْتِيَ الَّذِي دَعَاكَ مَعَهُ وَيَقُولَ لَكَ: دَعِ الْمَكَانَ لِهَذَا. فَحِينَئِذٍ تَبْتَدِئُ بِخَجَلٍ تَأْخُذُ الْمَوْضِعَ الْأَخِيرَ.
10 But when you are invited, go and sit down in the lowest place, so that when he who invited you comes he may say to you, ‘Friend, go up higher.’ Then you will have glory in the presence of those who sit at the table with you.
Ⲁⲗⲗⲁ ϩⲟⲧⲁⲛ ⲁⲩϣⲁⲛⲑⲁϩⲙⲉⲕ ⲙⲁϣⲉ ⲛⲁⲕ ⲣⲱⲧⲉⲃ ⲙ̀ⲡⲓϧⲁⲉ̀ ϩⲓⲛⲁ ϩⲟⲧⲁⲛ ⲁϥϣⲁⲛⲓ̀ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲫⲏⲉⲧⲁϥⲑⲁϩⲙⲉⲕ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉϥϫⲟⲥ ⲛⲁⲕ ϫⲉ ⲡⲁϣ̀ⲫⲏⲣ ⲟⲩⲟⲑⲃⲉⲕ ⲉ̀ⲡ̀ϣⲱⲓ ⲧⲟⲧⲉ ⲉⲣⲉ ⲟⲩⲱⲟⲩ ϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲛⲁⲕ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉⲙ̀ⲑⲟ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩⲟⲛ ⲛⲓⲃⲉⲛ ⲑⲣⲱⲧⲉⲃ ⲛⲉⲙⲁⲕ.
10 بَلْ مَتَى دُعِيتَ فَاذْهَبْ وَاتَّكِئْ فِي الْمَوْضِعِ الْأَخِيرِ، حَتَّى إِذَا جَاءَ الَّذِي دَعَاكَ يَقُولُ لَكَ: يَا صَدِيقِي، انْتَقِلْ إِلَى فَوْقُ. حِينَئِذٍ يَكُونُ لَكَ مَجْدٌ أَمَامَ كُلِّ الْمُتَّكِئِينَ مَعَكَ.
11 For whoever exalts himself will be humbled, and he who humbles himself will be exalted.”
Ϫⲉ ⲟⲩⲟⲛ ⲛⲓⲃⲉⲛ ⲉⲑⲛⲁϭⲁⲥϥ ⲥⲉⲛⲁⲑⲉⲃⲓⲟϥ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲫⲏⲉⲑⲛⲁⲑⲉⲃⲓⲟϥ ⲥⲉⲛⲁϭⲁⲥϥ.
11 لِأَنَّ كُلَّ مَنْ يَرْفَعُ نَفْسَهُ يَتَّضِعُ وَمَنْ يَضَعُ نَفْسَهُ يَرْتَفِعُ ".
12 Then He also said to him who invited Him, “When you give a dinner or a supper, do not ask your friends, your brothers, your relatives, nor rich neighbors, lest they also invite you back, and you be repaid.
Ⲛⲁϥϫⲱ ⲇⲉ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ⲙⲫⲏⲉⲧⲁϥⲑⲁϩⲙⲉϥ ϫⲉ ϩⲟⲧⲁⲛ ⲁⲕϣⲁⲛⲓ̀ⲣⲓ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩⲁⲣⲓⲥⲧⲟⲛ ⲓⲉ ⲟⲩⲇⲓⲡⲛⲟⲛ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉⲣⲙⲟⲩϯ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉⲕϣ̀ⲫⲏⲣ ⲟⲩⲇⲉ ⲛⲉⲕⲥ̀ⲛⲏⲟⲩ ⲟⲩⲇⲉ ⲛⲉⲕⲥⲩⲅⲅⲉⲛⲏⲥ ⲩⲇⲉ ⲛⲉⲕⲑⲉϣⲉⲩ ⲛ̀ⲣⲁⲙⲁⲟ ⲙⲏⲡⲱⲥ ⲛ̀ⲥⲉⲑⲁϩⲙⲉⲕ ϩⲱⲕ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲟⲩϣⲉⲃⲓⲱ ϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲛⲁⲕ.
12 وَكَانَ يَقُولُ لِلَّذِي دَعَاهُ: " إِذَا صَنَعْتَ غَدَاءً أَوْ عَشَاءً فَلَا تَدْعُ أَصْدِقَاءَكَ وَلَا إِخْوَتَكَ وَلَا أَقْرِبَاءَكَ وَلَا جِيرَانَكَ الْأَغْنِيَاءَ، لِئَلَّا يَدْعُوكَ أَنْتَ أَيْضًا، فَتَكَونَ لَكَ مُكَافَأَةٌ.
13 But when you give a feast, invite the poor, the maimed, the lame, the blind.
Ⲁⲗⲗⲁ ⲁⲕϣⲁⲛⲓ̀ⲣⲓ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩϣⲟⲡⲥ ⲙⲟⲩϯ ⲉ̀ϩⲁⲛϩⲏⲕⲓ ϩⲁⲛⲁⲧϫⲟⲙ ϩⲁⲛϭⲁⲗⲉⲩ ϩⲁⲛⲃⲉⲗⲗⲉⲩ.
13 بَلْ إِذَا صَنَعْتَ وَلِيمَةً فَادْعُ: الْمَسَاكِينَ وَالضُّعَفَاءَ وَالْعُرْجَ وَالْعُمْيَ،
14 And you will be blessed, because they cannot repay you; for you shall be repaid at the resurrection of the just.”
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲭ̀ⲛⲁⲉⲣⲟⲩⲙⲁⲕⲁⲣⲓⲟⲥ ϫⲉ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲛ ⲛ̀ⲧⲱⲟⲩ ⲙ̀ⲙⲁⲩ ⲉ̀ϯϣⲉⲃⲓⲱ ⲛⲁⲕ ⲥⲉⲛⲁϯ ⲁⲣ ⲛⲁⲕ ⲛ̀ⲧⲟⲩϣⲉⲃⲓⲱ ϧⲉⲛ ϯⲁⲛⲁⲥⲧⲁⲥⲓⲥ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲛⲓⲑ̀ⲙⲏⲓ.
14 فَتَصِيرَ مَغْبُوطًا إذْ لَيْسَ لَهُمْ ما يُكَافِئُونَكَ بِهِ، لِأَنَّكَ سَتُعْطَى المُكَافَأَةَ عَنْهُمْ فِي قِيَامَةِ الْأَبْرَارِ".
15 Now when one of those who sat at the table with Him heard these things, he said to Him, “Blessed is he who shall eat bread in the kingdom of God!”
Ⲉⲧⲁϥⲥⲱⲧⲉⲙ ⲇⲉ ⲉ̀ⲛⲁⲓ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲟⲩⲁⲓ ⲛ̀ⲛⲏⲉⲑⲣⲟⲧⲉⲃ ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ϫⲉ ⲱⲟⲩⲛⲓⲁⲧϥ ⲙⲫⲏⲉⲑⲛⲁⲟⲩⲱⲙ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩⲱⲓⲕ ϧⲉⲛ ϯⲙⲉⲧⲟⲩⲣⲟ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲫϯ.
15 فَلَمَّا سَمِعَ هَذَا أَحَدُ الْمُتَّكِئِينَ مَعَهُ قَالَ: " طُوبَى لِمَنْ يَأْكُلُ خُبْزًا فِي مَلَكُوتِ اللَّهِ ".