Prophecies
النبوآت
	Deuteronomy 5:15-22
(التثنية 5: 15-22)
A reading from the Book of Deuteronomy of Moses the prophet. May his holy blessings be with us. Amen.
Ⲉⲃⲟⲗϧⲉⲛ Ⲡⲓⲇⲉⲩⲧⲉⲣⲟⲛⲟⲙⲓⲟⲛ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ Ⲙⲱⲩ̀ⲥⲏⲥ ⲡⲓⲡ̀ⲣⲟⲫⲏⲧⲏⲥ: ⲉ̀ⲣⲉⲡⲉϥⲥ̀ⲙⲟⲩ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ ϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲛⲉⲙⲁⲛ ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ ⲉϥϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ:
من سفر التثنية لموسى النبي بركته المقدسة تكون معنا. آمين.
15 And remember that you were a slave in the land of Egypt, and the Lord your God brought you out from there by a mighty hand and by an outstretched arm; therefore the Lord your God commanded you to keep the Sabbath day.
15 وَاذْكُرْ أَنَّكِ كُنْتَ عَبْدًا فِي أَرْضِ مِصْرَ، فَأَخَرَجَكَ الرَّبُّ إلَهُكَ مِنْ هُنَاكَ بِيَدٍ عَزِيزَةٍ وَذِرَاعٍ رَفِيعَةٍ. وَلِذَلِكَ أَمَرَكَ الرَّبُّ إِلَهُكَ بِأَنْ تَحْفَظَ يَوْمَ السَّبْتِ لِتُقَدِّسَهُ.
16 ‘Honor your father and your mother, as the Lord your God has commanded you, that your days may be long, and that it may be well with you in the land which the Lord your God is giving you.
16 أَكْرِمْ أَبَاكَ وَأُمَّكَ كَمَا أَوْصَاكَ الرَّبُّ إِلَهُكَ، لِكَيْ تَطُولَ أَيَّامُكَ، وَتُصِيبَ خَيْرًا فِي الْأَرْضِ الَّتِي يُعْطِيكَ الرَّبُّ إِلَهُكَ.
17 ‘You shall not murder.
17 لَا تَقْتُلْ.
18 ‘You shall not commit adultery.
18 لَا تَزْنِ.
19 ‘You shall not steal.
19 لَا تَسْرِقْ.
20 ‘You shall not bear false witness against your neighbor.
20 لَا تَشْهَدْ عَلَى قَرِيبِكَ شَهَادَةَ زُورٍ.
21 ‘You shall not covet your neighbor’s wife; and you shall not desire your neighbor’s house, his field, his male servant, his female servant, his ox, his donkey, or anything that is your neighbor’s.’
21 وَلَا تَشْتَهِ اِمْرَأَةَ قَرِيبِكَ، وَلَا تَشْتَهِ بَيْتَهُ، وَلَا حَقْلَهُ، وَلَا عَبْدَهُ وَلَا أَمَتَهُ، وَلَا ثَوْرَهُ وَلَا حِمَارَهُ، ولَا شَيْئًا مِمَّا لِصَاحِبِكَ.
22 “These words the Lord spoke to all your assembly, in the mountain from the midst of the fire, the cloud, and the thick darkness, with a loud voice; and He added no more. And He wrote them on two tablets of stone and gave them to me.
22 هَذِهِ الكَلِمَاتُ كَلَّمَ الرَّبُّ بِهَا جَمَاعَتَكُمْ كُلَّهَا فِي الجَبَلِ، مِنْ وَسَطِ النَّارِ وَالظُّلْمَةِ وَالضَّبَابِ وَالْعَاصِفِ، بِصَوْتٍ عَظِيمٍ وَلَمْ يَزِدْ. وَكَتَبَهَا عَلَى لَوْحَيْنِ مِنْ حَجَرٍ، وَدَفَعَهَا إِلَيَّ.
Glory be to the Holy Trinity, our God, forever and unto the ages of all ages. Amen.
Ⲟⲩⲱ̀ⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ϯⲧ̀ⲣⲓⲁⲥ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ Ⲡⲉⲛⲛⲟⲩϯ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛⲉⲙ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲛⲓⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲧⲏⲣⲟⲩ: ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ.
مجداً للثالوث القدوس إلهنا الى أبد الآبدين كلها آمين.
	Isaiah 6:1-12
(اشعياء 6: 1-12)
A reading from Isaiah, the prophet. May his holy blessings be with us. Amen.
Ⲉⲃⲟⲗϧⲉⲛ Ⲏⲥⲁⲏ̀ⲁⲥ ⲡⲓⲡ̀ⲣⲟⲫⲏⲧⲏⲥ: ⲉ̀ⲣⲉⲡⲉϥⲥ̀ⲙⲟⲩ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ ϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲛⲉⲙⲁⲛ ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ ⲉϥϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ:
من اشعياء النبي بركته المقدسة تكون معنا. آمين.
1 In the year that King Uzziah died, I saw the Lord sitting on a throne, high and lifted up, and the train of His robe filled the temple.
1 وَكَانَ فِي السَّنَةِ الَّتِي مَاتَ فِيهَا الْمَلِكُ عُزِّيَّا، رَأَيْتُ السَّيِّدَ جَالِسًا عَلَى عَرْشٍ عَالٍ رَفِيعٍ، وَرَأَيْتُ الْبَيْتَ مَمْلُوءًا مِنْ مَجْدِهِ.
2 Above it stood seraphim; each one had six wings: with two he covered his face, with two he covered his feet, and with two he flew.
2 وَالسَّرَافِيمُ قِيَامٌ حَوْلَهُ، وَسِتَّةُ أَجْنِحَةٍ لِكُلِّ وَاحِدٍ، بِاثْنَيْنِ يَسْتُرُ وَجْهَهُ، وَبِاثْنَيْنِ يَسْتُرُ رِجْلَيْهِ، وَبِاثْنَيْنِ يَطِيرُ.
3 And one cried to another and said: “Holy, holy, holy is the Lord of hosts; The whole earth is full of His glory!”
3 وَيَهْتِفُ بَعْضُهُمْ إِلَى بَعْضٍ قَائِلِينَ: " قُدُّوسٌ، قُدُّوسٌ، قُدُّوسٌ، رَبُّ الصَّبَاؤوتِ. الْأَرْضُ كُلُّهَا مَمْلُوءَةٌ مِنْ مَجْدِكَ ".
4 And the posts of the door were shaken by the voice of him who cried out, and the house was filled with smoke.
4 فَاِرْتَفَعَتْ مَعَاقِمُ الْأَبْوَابِ مِنْ صَوْتِ الصَّارِخِ، وَاِمْتَلَأَ الْبَيْتُ دُخَانًا.
5 So I said: “Woe is me, for I am undone! Because I am a man of unclean lips, And I dwell in the midst of a people of unclean lips; For my eyes have seen the King, The Lord of hosts.”
5 فَقُلْتُ: " وَيْلٌ لِي قَدْ هَلِكْتُ، لِأَنِّي رَجُلٌ دَنِسُ الشَّفَتَيْنِ، وَأَنَا مُقِيمٌ بَيْنَ شَعْبٍ دَنِسِي الشِّفَاهِ، وَقَدْ رَأَتْ عَيْنَايَ الْمَلِكَ رَبَّ الْجُنُودِ ".
6 Then one of the seraphim flew to me, having in his hand a live coal which he had taken with the tongs from the altar.
6 فَطَارَ إِلَيَّ أَحَدُ السَّرَافِيمِ وَبِيَدِهِ جَمْرَةٌ قَدْ أَخَذَهَا بِمِلْقَطٍ مِنْ فَوْقِ الْمَذْبَحِ،
7 And he touched my mouth with it, and said: “Behold, this has touched your lips; Your iniquity is taken away, And your sin purged.”
7 وَمَسَّ بِهَا فَمِي، وَقَالَ لِي: " هَا إِنَّ هَذِهِ قَدْ مَسَّتْ شَفَتَيْكَ، فَانْتُزِعَ إِثْمُكَ، وَكُفِّرَتْ خَطِيَّتُكَ ".
8 Also I heard the voice of the Lord, saying: “Whom shall I send, And who will go for Us?” Then I said, “Here am I! Send me.”
8 وَسَمِعْتُ صَوْتَ الرَّبِّ يَقُولُ: " مَنْ أُرْسِلُ؟ وَمَنْ يَنْطَلِقُ إِلَى هَذَا الشَّعْبِ؟ " فَقُلْتُ: " هأَنَذَا فَأَرْسِلْنِي ".
9 And He said, “Go, and tell this people: ‘Keep on hearing, but do not understand; Keep on seeing, but do not perceive.’
9 فَقَالَ: " اِنْطَلِقْ وَقُلْ لِهَذَا الشَّعْبِ: اِسْمَعُوا سَمَاعًا وَلَا تَفْهَمُوا، وَاِنْظُرُوا نَظَرًا وَلَا تَعْرِفُوا.
10 “Make the heart of this people dull, And their ears heavy, And shut their eyes; Lest they see with their eyes, And hear with their ears, And understand with their heart, And return and be healed.”
10 غَلِّظْ قَلْبَ هَذَا الشَّعْبِ، وَثَقِّلْ أُذُنَيْهِ، وَأَغْمِضْ عَيْنَيْهِ، لِئَلَّا يُبْصِرَ بِعَيْنَيْهِ، وَيَسْمَعَ بِأُذُنَيْهِ، وَيَفْهَمَ بِقَلْبِهِ، وَيَرْجِعَ فَيُشْفَى ".
11 Then I said, “Lord, how long?” And He answered: “Until the cities are laid waste and without inhabitant, The houses are without a man, The land is utterly desolate,
11 فَقُلْتُ: " إِلَى مَتَى يَا رَبُّ؟ ". فَقَالَ: " إِلَى أَنْ تَصِيرَ الْمُدُنُ خَرِبَةً بَلَا سَاكِنٍ، وَالْبُيُوتُ بِلَا إِنْسَانٍ، وَتَخْرَبَ الْأَرْضُ وَتُقْفِرَ،
12 The Lord has removed men far away, And the forsaken places are many in the midst of the land.
12 وَيُقْصِي الرَّبُّ الْبَشَرَ، وَتَبْقَى فِي الْأَرْضِ وَحْشَةٌ عَظِيمَةٌ ".
Glory be to the Holy Trinity, our God, forever and unto the ages of all ages. Amen.
Ⲟⲩⲱ̀ⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ϯⲧ̀ⲣⲓⲁⲥ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ Ⲡⲉⲛⲛⲟⲩϯ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛⲉⲙ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲛⲓⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲧⲏⲣⲟⲩ: ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ.
مجداً للثالوث القدوس إلهنا الى أبد الآبدين كلها آمين.