Stand in the fear of God and listen to the Holy Gospel. A reading from the Gospel according to our teacher Saint Luke the Evangelist, and the pure disciple. May his blessings be with us all.
قِفُوا بِخَوْفِ اللهِ، وَأَنْصِتُوا لِسَمَاعِ الإِنْجِيلِ الْمُقَدَّسِ. فَصْلٌ مِنْ بِشَارَةِ الإِنْجِيلِ لِمُعَلِّمِنَا مَارْ لوقا الْبَشِيرِ، التِّلْمِيذِ الطَّاهِرِ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
From the Psalms of our teacher David the prophet. May his blessings be with us all.
مِنْ مَزَامِيرِ تَرَاتِيلِ مُعَلِّمِنَا دَاوُدَ النَّبِيِّ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
Matins Psalm
المزمور
	Psalms 40:4, 12
(مزامير 40: 4, 12)
I said, Lord, be merciful to me; Heal my soul, for I have sinned against You. Blessed be the Lord God of Israel From everlasting to everlasting! Amen and Amen.
Ⲁ̀ⲛⲟⲕ ⲁⲓϫⲟⲥ ϫⲉ Ⲡⲟ︦ⲥ︦ ⲛⲁⲓ ⲛⲏⲓ: ⲙⲁⲧⲟⲩϫⲟ ⲛ̀ⲧⲁⲯⲩⲭⲏ ϫⲉ ⲁⲓⲉⲣⲛⲟⲃⲓ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟⲕ: ϥ̀ⲥ̀ⲙⲁⲣⲱⲟⲩⲧ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ Ⲡⲟ︦ⲥ︦ Ⲫϯ ⲙ̀Ⲡⲓⲥ︦ⲗ︦: ⲓⲥϫⲉⲛ ⲡ̀̀ⲉⲛⲉϩ ϣⲁⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲉⲥⲉ̀ϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲉⲥⲉ̀ϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲁ︦ⲗ︦.
أَنَا قُلْتُ يَا رَبُّ ارْحَمْنِي. اِشْفِ نَفْسِي لِأَنِّي قَدْ أَخْطَأْتُ إِلَيْكَ. مُبَارَكٌ الرَّبُّ إِلَهُ إِسْرَائِيلَ، مِنَ الْأَزَلِ وَإِلَى الْأَبَدِ يَكُونُ يَكُونُ.
People:
Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
الليلويا.
	Psalm Trailer for the Pope or a Bishop
(Ⲙⲁⲣⲟⲩϭⲁⲥϥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲧ̀ⲉⲕⲕ̀ⲗⲏⲥⲓⲁ̀...)
People:
Amen Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲙⲏⲛ Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
امين الليلويا.
Then the introduction to the Gospel is read.
ثم تقال مقدمة الأنجيل وهي:
Reader:
Blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord. Our Lord, God, Savior and King of us all, Jesus Christ, Son of the living God to whom is glory forever. Amen.
القارﺉُ:
مباركٌ الآتي باسمِ الربِّ إلهِ القواتِ، ربُّنا وإلهُنا ومخلصُنا وملكُنا كلِّنا، يسوعُ المسيحُ، ابنُ اللهِ الحيِّ، الذي لهُ المجدُ إلى الأبدِ. آمين.
Matins Gospel
الإنجيل
	Luke 12:22-31
(لوقا 12: 22-31)
22 Then He said to His disciples, “Therefore I say to you, do not worry about your life, what you will eat; nor about the body, what you will put on.
Ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ⲇⲉ ⲛ̀ⲛⲉϥⲙⲁⲑⲏⲧⲏⲥ ϫⲉ ⲉⲑⲃⲉⲫⲁⲓ ϯϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ⲛⲱⲧⲉⲛ ϫⲉ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉⲣϥⲓⲣⲱⲟⲩϣ ϧⲁ ⲧⲉⲧⲉⲛⲯⲩⲭⲏ ϫⲉ ⲩ ⲉⲧⲉⲧⲉⲛⲛⲁⲟⲩⲟⲙϥ ⲟⲩⲇⲉ ϧⲁ ⲡⲉⲧⲉⲛⲥⲱⲙⲁ ϫⲉ ⲟⲩ ⲡⲉⲧⲉⲧⲉⲛⲛⲁⲧⲏⲓϥ ϩⲓ ⲑⲏⲛⲟⲩ.
22 ثُمَّ قَالَ لِتَلَامِيذِهِ: فَلِهَذَا أَقُولُ لَكُمْ: لاَ تَهْتَمُّوا لِأَنْفُسِكُمْ بِمَا تَأْكُلُونَ، وَلَا لِأَجْسَادِكُمْ بِمَا تَلْبَسُونَ.
23 Life is more than food, and the body is more than clothing.
Ϯⲯⲩⲭⲏ ⲅⲁⲣ ⲟⲩⲟⲧ ⲉ̀ϯ ϧ̀ⲣⲉ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲡⲓⲥⲱⲙⲁ ⲉϯϩⲉⲃⲥⲱ.
23 فَإِنَّ النَّفَسَ أَفْضَلُ مِنَ الطّعَامِ، وَالْجَسَدَ أَفْضَلُ مِنَ اللِّبَاسِ.
24 Consider the ravens, for they neither sow nor reap, which have neither storehouse nor barn; and God feeds them. Of how much more value are you than the birds?
Ⲙⲁⲓⲁⲧⲉⲛ ⲑⲏⲛⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ⲛⲓⲁⲃⲱⲕ ϫⲉ ⲥⲉⲥⲓϯ ⲁⲛ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲥⲉⲱⲥϧ ⲁⲛ ⲛⲏ ⲉ̀ⲧⲉⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲛ ⲧⲁⲙⲓⲟⲛ ⲛ̀ⲧⲱⲟⲩ ⲟⲩⲇⲉ ⲁ̀ⲡⲟⲑⲏⲕⲏ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ϯ ϣⲁⲛϣ ⲙ̀ⲙⲱⲟⲩ ⲁⲩⲏⲣ ⲙⲁⲗⲗⲟⲛ ⲛ̀ⲑⲱⲧⲉⲛ ⲧⲉⲧⲉⲛⲟⲩⲟⲧ ⲉ̀ⲛⲓϩⲁⲗⲁϯ.
24 تَأَمَّلُوا الْغِرْبَانَ: فَإِنَّهَا لَا تَزْرَعُ وَلَا تَحْصُدُ، وَلَيْسَ لَهَا مَخْدَعٌ وَلَا مَخْزَنٌ، وَاللَّهُ يَقُوتُهَا. فَكَمْ أَنْتُمْ بِالْحَرِيِّ أَفْضَلُ مِنَ الطُّيُورِ!
25 And which of you by worrying can add one cubit to his stature?
Ⲛⲓⲙ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ϧⲉⲛ ⲑⲏⲛⲟⲩ ⲉϥϥⲓⲣⲱⲟⲩϣ ⲉ̀ⲧⲉⲟⲩⲟⲛ ϣ̀ϫⲟⲙ ⲙⲙⲟϥ ⲉ̀ⲧⲁⲗⲉ ⲟⲩⲙⲁϩⲓ ⲛ̀ϣⲓⲏ ⲉ̀ϫⲉⲛ ⲧⲉϥⲙⲁⲓⲏ.
25 وَمَنْ مِنْكُمْ إِذَا اِهْتَمَّ يَقْدِرُ أَنْ يَزِيدَ عَلَى قَامَتِهِ ذِرَاعًا وَاحِدَةً؟
26 If you then are not able to do the least, why are you anxious for the rest?
Ⲓⲥϫⲉ ⲟⲩⲛ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲛ ϣ̀ϫⲟⲙ ⲙ̀ⲙⲱⲧⲉⲛ ⲉ̀ⲟⲩⲕⲟⲩϫⲓ ⲓⲉ ⲉⲑⲃⲉⲟⲩ ⲧⲉⲧⲉⲛϥⲓⲣⲱⲟⲩϣ ϧⲁ ⲡ̀ⲥⲉⲡⲓ.
26 فَإِنْ كُنْتُمْ لَا تَقْدِرُونَ وَلَا عَلَى الْأَصْغَرِ، فَلِمَاذَا تَهْتَمُّونَ بِالْبَوَاقِي؟
27 Consider the lilies, how they grow: they neither toil nor spin; and yet I say to you, even Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of these.
Ⲙⲁⲓⲁⲧⲉⲛ ⲑⲏⲛⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ⲛⲓϩ̀ⲣⲏⲣⲓ ϫⲉ ⲡⲱⲥ ⲥⲉⲁⲓⲁⲓ ⲛ̀ⲥⲉϧⲟⲥⲓ ⲁⲛ ⲟⲩⲇⲉ ⲛ̀ⲥⲉⲉⲣⲓⲟⲡⲏ ⲁⲛ ϯϫⲱ ⲇⲉ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ⲛⲱⲧⲉⲛ ϫⲉ ⲟⲩⲇⲉ ⲟⲗⲟⲙⲱⲛ ϧⲉⲛ ⲡⲉϥⲱⲟⲩ ⲧⲏⲣϥ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉϥϯ ϩⲓⲱⲧϥ ⲙ̀ⲫ̀ⲣⲏϯ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩⲁⲓ ⲛ̀ⲛⲁⲓ.
27 تَأَمَّلُوا الزُّهُورَ كَيْفَ تَنْمُو: لَا تَتْعَبُ وَلَا تَحْتَرِفُ حِرْفَةٍ، وَلكِنْ أَقُولُ لَكُمْ: إِنَّهُ وَلَا سُلَيْمَانُ فِي كُلِّ مَجْدِهِ كَانَ يَلْبَسُ كَوَاحِدَةٍ مِنْهَا.
28 If then God so clothes the grass, which today is in the field and tomorrow is thrown into the oven, how much more will He clothe you, O you of little faith?
Ⲓⲥϫⲉ ⲇⲉ ⲡⲓⲥⲓⲙ ϥ̀ϣⲟⲡ ⲙ̀ⲫⲟⲟⲩ ϧⲉⲛ ⲧ̀ⲕⲟⲓ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲣⲁⲥϯ ⲁⲩϩⲓⲧϥ ⲉ̀ϯⲑ̀ⲣⲓⲣ ⲡⲁⲓⲣⲏϯ ⲫϯ ϯϩⲉⲃⲥⲱ ϩⲓⲱⲧϥ ⲡⲟⲥⲱ ⲙⲁⲗⲗⲟⲛ ⲛⲁ ⲡⲓⲕⲟⲩϫⲓ ⲛ̀ⲛⲁϩϯ.
28 فَإِنْ كَانَ الْعُشْبُ الَّذِي يُوجَدُ الْيَوْمَ فِي الْحَقْلِ وَيُطْرَحُ غَدًا فِي التَّنُّورِ يُلْبِسُهُ اللَّهُ هكَذَا، فَكَمْ بِالْحَرِيِّ أَنْتُمْ يَا قَلِيلِي الإِيمَانِ؟
29 “And do not seek what you should eat or what you should drink, nor have an anxious mind.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛ̀ⲑⲱⲧⲉⲛ ϩⲱⲧⲉⲛ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉⲣⲕⲱϯ ϫⲉ ⲟⲩ ⲉⲧⲉⲧⲉⲛⲛⲁⲟⲩⲟⲙϥ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲟⲩ ⲡⲉⲧⲉⲧⲉⲛⲛⲁⲥⲟϥ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉⲣϥⲓⲣⲱⲟⲩϣ.
29 فَلَا تَطْلُبُوا أَنْتُمْ مَا تَأْكُلُونَ وَمَا تَشْرَبُونَ وَلَا تَهْتَمُّوا،
30 For all these things the nations of the world seek after, and your Father knows that you need these things.
Ⲛⲁⲓ ⲅⲁⲣ ⲧⲏⲣⲟⲩ ⲛⲓⲉⲑⲛⲓⲕⲟⲥ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲡⲓⲕⲟⲥⲙⲟⲥ ⲥⲉⲕⲱϯ ⲛⲥⲱⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ⲑⲱⲧⲉⲛ ⲡⲉⲧⲉⲛⲓⲱⲧ ⲥⲱⲟⲩⲛ ϫⲉ ⲧⲉⲧⲉⲛⲉⲣⲭ̀ⲣⲓⲁ ⲛ̀ⲛⲁⲓ.
30 فَإِنَّ هَذِهِ كُلَّهَا تَطْلُبُهَا أُمَمُ الْعَالَمِ. وَأَمَّا أَنْتُمْ فَأَبُوكُمْ يَعْلَمُ أَنَّكُمْ تَحْتَاجُونَ إِلَى هَذِهِ،
31 But seek the kingdom of God, and all these things shall be added to you.
Ⲡ̀ⲗⲏⲛ ⲕⲱϯ ⲛ̀ⲥⲁ ⲧⲉϥⲙⲉⲧⲟⲩⲣⲟ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛⲁⲓ ⲧⲏⲣⲟⲩ ⲥⲉⲛⲁⲟⲩⲁϩⲟⲩ ⲉⲣⲱⲧⲉⲛ.
31 بَلُ اطْلُبُوا مَلَكُوتَ اللَّهِ، وَهَذِهِ جَمِيعُهَا تُزَادُ لَكُمْ.