Prophecies
النبوآت
	Proverbs 2:1-15
(أمثال 2: 1-15)
A reading from the Proverbs of Solomon the prophet. May his holy blessings be with us. Amen.
Ⲉⲃⲟⲗϧⲉⲛ ⲛⲓⲡⲁⲣⲟⲓⲙⲓⲁ̀ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ Ⲥⲟⲗⲟⲙⲱⲛ ⲡⲓⲡ̀ⲣⲟⲫⲏⲧⲏⲥ: ⲉ̀ⲣⲉⲡⲉϥⲥ̀ⲙⲟⲩ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ ϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲛⲉⲙⲁⲛ ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ ⲉϥϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ:
من أمثال سليمان النبي بركته المقدسة تكون معنا. آمين.
1 My son, if you receive my words, And treasure my commands within you,
1 يَا ابْنِي، إِنْ قَبِلْتَ كَلَامِي وَصُنْتَ وَصَايَايَ عِنْدَكَ،
2 So that you incline your ear to wisdom, And apply your heart to understanding; and shall apply it to the instruction of your son.
2 حَتَّى تُصْغِيَ بِأُذُنِكَ إِلَى الْحِكْمَةِ، وَتُمِيلَ قَلْبَكَ إِلَى الْفَهْمِ وَتُعْطِيَهُ تَعْلِيمًا لِابْنِكَ،
3 Yes, if you cry out for discernment, And lift up your voice for understanding,
3 إِنْ دَعَوْتَ الْفِطْنَةَ وَأَطْلَقْتَ إِلَى الْفَهْمِ صَوْتَكَ،
4 If you seek her as silver, And search for her as for hidden treasures;
4 إِنِ الْتَمَسْتَهُ كَالْفِضَّةِ، وَبَحَثْتَ عَنْهُ كَالْكُنُوزِ،
5 Then you will understand the fear of the Lord, And find the knowledge of God.
5 فَحِينَئِذٍ تَفْطَنُ لِمَخَافَةِ الرَّبِّ، وَتُدْرِكُ مَعْرِفَةَ اللَّهِ.
6 For the Lord gives wisdom; From His mouth come knowledge and understanding;
6 لِأَنَّ الرَّبَّ يُؤْتِي الْحِكْمَةَ. وَمِنْ فَمِهِ الْعِلْمُ وَالْفِطْنَةُ.
7 He stores up sound wisdom for the upright; He is a shield to those who walk uprightly;
7 يَذْخَرُ لِلْمُسْتَقِيمِينَ مَعُونَةً. وَيَعْضُدُ سُبُلَهُمْ
8 He guards the paths of justice, And preserves the way of His saints.
8 ِحِفْظِ مَنَاهِجِ الْعَدْلِ، وَحِفْظِ طَرِيقِ أَصْفِيَائِهِ.
9 Then you will understand righteousness and justice, Equity and every good path.
9 حِينَئِذٍ تَفْطَنُ لِلْعَدْلِ وَالْحَقِّ وَالْإِنْصَافِ وَالاِسْتِقَامَةِ، وَكُلِّ مَنْهَجٍ صَالِحٍ.
10 When wisdom enters your heart, And knowledge is pleasant to your soul,
10 إِذَا دَخَلَتِ الْحِكْمَةُ قَلْبَكَ، وَلَذَّتِ الْمَعْرِفَةُ نَفْسَكَ،
11 Discretion will preserve you; Understanding will keep you,
11 فَالْعَقْلُ يَحْفَظُكَ، وَالْفِكْرُ الطَّاهِرُ يُنَجِّيكَ،
12 To deliver you from the way of evil, From the man who speaks perverse things,
12 فَيُنْقِذُكَ مِنْ طَرِيقِ السُّوءِ، وَمِنَ الْإِنْسَانِ النَّاطِقِ بِالْخَدَائِعِ،
13 From those who leave the paths of uprightness To walk in the ways of darkness;
13 مِنَ الَّذِينَ يَتْرُكُونَ سُبُلَ الاِسْتِقَامَةِ لِيَسِيرُوا فِي طُرُقِ الظُّلْمَةِ،
14 Who rejoice in doing evil, And delight in the perversity of the wicked;
14 وَيَفْرَحُونَ بِصَنِيعِ الشَّرِّ، وَيَبْتَهِجُونَ بِخَدَائِعِ السُّوءِ،
15 Whose ways are crooked, And who are devious in their paths;
15 الَّذِينَ سُبُلُهُمْ مُعْوَجَّةٌ، وَمَنَاهِجُهُمْ مُلْتَوِيَةٌ.
Glory be to the Holy Trinity, our God, forever and unto the ages of all ages. Amen.
Ⲟⲩⲱ̀ⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ϯⲧ̀ⲣⲓⲁⲥ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ Ⲡⲉⲛⲛⲟⲩϯ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛⲉⲙ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲛⲓⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲧⲏⲣⲟⲩ: ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ.
مجداً للثالوث القدوس إلهنا الى أبد الآبدين كلها آمين.
	Isaiah 10:12-20
(اشعياء 10: 12-20)
A reading from Isaiah, the prophet. May his holy blessings be with us. Amen.
Ⲉⲃⲟⲗϧⲉⲛ Ⲏⲥⲁⲏ̀ⲁⲥ ⲡⲓⲡ̀ⲣⲟⲫⲏⲧⲏⲥ: ⲉ̀ⲣⲉⲡⲉϥⲥ̀ⲙⲟⲩ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ ϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲛⲉⲙⲁⲛ ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ ⲉϥϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ:
من اشعياء النبي بركته المقدسة تكون معنا. آمين.
12 Therefore it shall come to pass, when the Lord has performed all His work on Mount Zion and on Jerusalem, that He will say, “I will punish the fruit of the arrogant heart of the king of Assyria, and the glory of his haughty looks.”
12 إِنِّي أَنَا السَّيِّدُ بَعْدَ اسْتِكْمَالِي جَمِيعَ عَمَلِي فِي جَبَلِ صِهْيَوْنَ، أَفْتَقِدُ ثَمَرَةَ قَلْبِ مَلِكِ أَشُّورَ الْمُتَكَبِّرِ وَافْتِخَارَ عَيْنَيْهِ الطَّامِحَتَيْنِ.
13 For he says: “By the strength of my hand I have done it, And by my wisdom, for I am prudent; Also I have removed the boundaries of the people, And have robbed their treasuries; So I have put down the inhabitants like a valiant man.
13 فَإِنَّهُ قَالَ: إِنِّي بِقُوَّةِ يَدِي عَمِلْتُ، وَبِحِكْمَتِي. لِأَنِّي فَهِيمٌ. فَنَقَلْتُ تُخُومَ الشُّعُوبِ، وَنَهَبْتُ ذَخَائِرَهُمْ، وَأَنْزَلْتُ الْجَالِسِينَ عَلَى الْعُرُوشِ كَمَا يَفْعَلُ ذُو بَطْشٍ.
14 My hand has found like a nest the riches of the people, And as one gathers eggs that are left, I have gathered all the earth; And there was no one who moved his wing, Nor opened his mouth with even a peep.”
14 وَقَدْ أَصَابَتْ يَدِي ثَرْوَةَ الشُّعُوبِ كَعُشٍّ، وَكَمَنْ يَجْمَعُ الْبَيْضَ الْمُهْمَلَ، جَمَعْتُ الْأَرْضَ بِأَسْرِهَا، وَلَمْ يَكُنْ مَنْ يُحَرِّكُ جَنَاحًا أَوْ يَفْتَحُ فَمًا أَوْ يَنْبِضُ.
15 Shall the ax boast itself against him who chops with it? Or shall the saw exalt itself against him who saws with it? As if a rod could wield itself against those who lift it up, Or as if a staff could lift up, as if it were not wood!
15 أَتَفْتَخِرُ الْفَأْسُ عَلَى مَنْ يَقْطَعُ بِهَا، أَوْ يَتَكَبَّرُ الْمِنْشَارُ عَلَى مَنْ يُحَرِّكُهُ؟! كَأَنَّ الْقَضِيبَ يُحَرِّكُ رَافِعِيِهِ، كَأَنَّ الْعَصَا تَرْفَعُ مَنْ لَيْسَ بِخَشَبٍ!
16 Therefore the Lord, the Lord of hosts, Will send leanness among his fat ones; And under his glory He will kindle a burning Like the burning of a fire.
16 فَلِذَلِكَ يُرْسِلُ السَّيِّدُ، سَيِّدُ الْجُنُودِ، عَلَى سِمَانِهِ هُزَالًا. وَيَضْرِمُ تَحْتَ مَجْدِهِ وَقِيدًا كَضِرَامِ النَّارِ.
17 So the Light of Israel will be for a fire, And his Holy One for a flame; It will burn and devour His thorns and his briers in one day.
17 وَيَكُونُ نُورُ إِسْرَائِيلَ نَارًا، وَقُدُّوسُهُ لَهِيبًا، فَيُحْرِقُ وَيَأْكُلُ حَسَكَهُ وَشَوْكَهُ فِي يَوْمٍ وَاحِدٍ.
18 And it will consume the glory of his forest and of his fruitful field, Both soul and body; And they will be as when a sick man wastes away.
18 وَيُفْنِي مَجْدَ غَابِهِ وَكَرْمَلِهِ الرُّوحَ وَالْجَسَدَ، فَتُضْحِي كَمَسْلُولٍ يَذُوبُ.
19 Then the rest of the trees of his forest Will be so few in number That a child may write them.
19 وَمَا يَبْقَى مِنْ شَجَرِ الْغَابَةِ يَكُونُ قَلِيلًا حَتَّى إِنَّ صَبِيًّا يُحْصِيهِ.
20 And it shall come to pass in that day That the remnant of Israel, And such as have escaped of the house of Jacob, Will never again depend on him who defeated them, But will depend on the Lord, the Holy One of Israel, in truth.
20 وَفِي ذَلِكَ الْيَوْمِ لَا تَعُودُ بَقِيَّةُ إِسْرَائِيلَ وَالنَّاجُونَ مِنْ آلِ يَعْقُوبَ يَعْتَمِدُونَ عَلَى مَنْ ضَرَبَهُمْ، وَإِنَّمَا يَعْتَمِدُونَ عَلَى الرَّبِّ قُدُّوسِ إِسْرَائِيلَ بِالْحَقِّ.
Glory be to the Holy Trinity, our God, forever and unto the ages of all ages. Amen.
Ⲟⲩⲱ̀ⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ϯⲧ̀ⲣⲓⲁⲥ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ Ⲡⲉⲛⲛⲟⲩϯ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛⲉⲙ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲛⲓⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲧⲏⲣⲟⲩ: ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ.
مجداً للثالوث القدوس إلهنا الى أبد الآبدين كلها آمين.