Stand in the fear of God and listen to the Holy Gospel. A reading from the Gospel according to our teacher Saint Matthew the Evangelist, and the pure disciple. May his blessings be with us all.
قِفُوا بِخَوْفِ اللهِ، وَأَنْصِتُوا لِسَمَاعِ الإِنْجِيلِ الْمُقَدَّسِ. فَصْلٌ مِنْ بِشَارَةِ الإِنْجِيلِ لِمُعَلِّمِنَا مَارْ متى الْبَشِيرِ، التِّلْمِيذِ الطَّاهِرِ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
From the Psalms of our teacher David the prophet. May his blessings be with us all.
مِنْ مَزَامِيرِ تَرَاتِيلِ مُعَلِّمِنَا دَاوُدَ النَّبِيِّ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
Vespers Psalm
المزمور
	Psalms 111:1
(مزامير 111: 1)
Blessed is the man who fears the Lord, Who delights greatly in His commandments. His descendants will be mighty on earth; The generation of the upright will be blessed.
Ⲱⲟⲩⲛⲓⲁⲧϥ ⲙ̀ⲡⲓⲙⲁⲓⲣⲱⲙⲓ ⲉⲧⲉⲣϩⲟϯ ϧⲁⲧϩⲏ ⲙ̀Ⲡⲟ︦ⲥ︦: ⲛ̀ϩ̀ⲣⲏⲓ ϧⲉⲛ ⲛⲉϥⲉⲛⲧⲟⲗⲏ ⲉϥⲉ̀ⲟⲩⲱϣⲥ ⲉ̀ⲙⲁϣⲱ: ⲉϥⲉ̀ϫⲉⲙϫⲟⲙ ϩⲓϫⲉⲛ ⲡ̀ⲕⲁϩⲓ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲡⲉϥϫ̀ⲣⲟϫ: ⲉⲩⲉ̀ⲥ̀ⲙⲟⲩ ⲉ̀ϯⲅⲉⲛⲉⲁ̀ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲛⲏⲉⲧⲥⲟⲩⲧⲱⲛ. ⲁ︦ⲗ︦.
طُوبَى لِلرَّجُلِ الْخَائِفِ مِنَ الرَّبِّ. وَيَهْوَى وَصَايَاه جِدًّا. يَقْوَى نَسْلُهُ عَلَى الأَرْضِ، وَيُبَارَكُ جِيلُ الْمُسْتَقِيمِينَ. هَلِّلُويَا.
People:
Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
الليلويا.
	Psalm Trailer for the Pope or a Bishop
(Ⲙⲁⲣⲟⲩϭⲁⲥϥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲧ̀ⲉⲕⲕ̀ⲗⲏⲥⲓⲁ̀...)
People:
Amen Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲙⲏⲛ Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
امين الليلويا.
Then the introduction to the Gospel is read.
ثم تقال مقدمة الأنجيل وهي:
Reader:
Blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord. Our Lord, God, Savior and King of us all, Jesus Christ, Son of the living God to whom is glory forever. Amen.
القارﺉُ:
مباركٌ الآتي باسمِ الربِّ إلهِ القواتِ، ربُّنا وإلهُنا ومخلصُنا وملكُنا كلِّنا، يسوعُ المسيحُ، ابنُ اللهِ الحيِّ، الذي لهُ المجدُ إلى الأبدِ. آمين.
Vespers Gospel
الإنجيل
	Matthew 25:14-23
(متى 25: 14-23)
14 “There was a man traveling to a far country, who called his own servants and delivered his goods to them.
Ⲙ̀ⲫ̀ⲣⲏϯ ⲅⲁⲣ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩⲣⲱⲙⲓ ⲉϥⲛⲁϣⲉⲛⲁϥ ⲉ̀ⲡ̀ϣⲉⲙⲙⲟ ⲁϥⲙⲟⲩϯ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϥⲉ̀ⲃⲓⲁⲓⲕ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁϥϯ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉⲧⲉⲛⲧⲁϥ ⲉ̀ⲧⲟⲧⲟⲩ.
14 وَكَأَنَّمَا إنْسَانٌ مُسَافِرٌ دَعَا عَبِيدَهُ وَسَلَّمَهُمْ أَمْوَالَهُ،
15 And to one he gave five talents, to another two, and to another one, to each according to his own ability; and immediately he went on a journey.
Ⲟⲩⲁⲓ ⲙⲉⲛ ⲁϥϯ ⲛⲁϥ ⲛ̀ⲉ︦ ⲛ̀ϫⲓⲛϭⲱⲣ ⲕⲉⲟⲩⲁⲓ ⲇⲉ ⲁϥϯ ⲛⲁϥ ⲛ̀ ⲃ︦ ⲕⲉⲟⲩⲁⲓ ⲇⲉ ⲁϥϯ ⲛⲁϥ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩⲁⲓ ⲡⲓⲟⲩⲁⲓ ⲡⲓⲟⲩⲁⲓ ⲕⲁⲧⲁ ⲧⲉϥϫⲟⲙ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁϥϣⲉⲛⲁϥ ⲉ̀ⲡ̀ϣⲉⲙⲙⲟ.
15 فَأَعْطَى وَاحِدًا خَمْسَ وَزَنَاتٍ، وَآخَرَ وَزْنَتَيْنِ، وَآخَرَ وَزْنَةً. كُلَّ وَاحِدٍ عَلَى قَدْرِ طَاقَتِهِ. وَسَافَرَ.
16 Then he who had received the five talents went and traded with them, and made another five talents.
Ⲁϥϣⲉⲛⲁϥ ⲇⲉ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲫⲏⲉ̀ⲧϭⲓ ⲙ̀ⲡⲓⲉ︦ ⲛ̀ϫⲓⲛϭⲱⲣ ⲁϥⲉⲣϩⲱⲃ ⲛ̀ϧⲏⲧⲟⲩ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁϥϫ̀ⲫⲉ ⲕⲉ ⲉ︦.
16 فَمَضَى الَّذِي أَخَذَ الْخَمْسَ وَزَنَاتٍ وَتَاجَرَ بِهَا، فَرَبِحَ خَمْسًا أُخَرَ.
17 And likewise he who had received two gained two more also.
Ⲡⲁⲓⲣⲏϯ ⲟⲛ ⲫⲏⲉ̀ⲧⲁϥϭⲓ ⲙ̀ⲡⲓ ⲃ︦ ⲁϥϫ̀ⲫⲉ ⲕⲉ ⲃ︦.
17 وَهكَذَا أَيْضًا الَّذِي أَخَذَ الاثْنَتَيْنِ، رَبِحَ اثْنَتَيْنِ أُخْرَيَيْنِ.
18 But he who had received one went and dug in the ground, and hid his lord’s money.
Ⲫⲏ ⲇⲉ ⲉ̀ⲧⲁϥϭⲓ ⲙ̀ⲡⲓⲟⲩⲁⲓ ⲁϥϣⲉⲛⲁϥ ⲁϥϣⲱⲕⲓ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩⲕⲁϩⲓ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁϥⲭⲱⲡ ⲙ̀ⲡⲓϩⲁⲧ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲡⲉϥⲟ︦ⲥ︦.
18 وَأمَّا الَّذِي أَخَذَ الْوَاحِدةَ فَمَضَى وَحَفَرَ في الأَرْضِ وَأَخْفَى فِضَّةَ سَيِّدِهِ.
19 After a long time the lord of those servants came and settled accounts with them.
Ⲙⲉⲛⲉⲛⲥⲁ ⲟⲩⲛⲓϣϯ ⲇⲉ ⲛ̀ⲥⲏⲟⲩ ⲁϥⲓ̀ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ Ⲡⲟ︦ⲥ︦ ⲛ̀ⲛⲓⲉ̀ⲃⲓⲁⲓⲕ ⲉ̀ⲧⲉⲙ̀ⲙⲁⲩ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁϥϥⲓⲱⲡ ⲛⲉⲙⲱⲟⲩ.
19 وَبَعْدَ زَمَانٍ طَوِيلٍ جَاءَ سَيِّدُ أُولئِكَ الْعَبِيدِ وَحَاسَبَهُمْ.
20 “So he who had received five talents came and brought five other talents, saying, ‘Lord, you delivered to me five talents; look, I have gained five more talents besides them.’
Ⲁϥⲓ̀ ⲇⲉ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲫⲏⲉ̀ⲧⲁϥϭⲓ ⲙ̀ⲡⲓ ⲉ︦ ⲛ̀ϫⲓⲛϭⲱⲣ ⲁϥⲉⲛ ⲕⲉ ⲉ︦ ⲛ̀ϫⲓⲛϭⲱⲣ ⲉϥϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ϫⲉ ⲡⲁⲟ︦ⲥ︦ ⲉ︦ ⲛ̀ϫⲓⲛϭⲱⲣ ⲁⲕⲧⲏⲓⲧⲟⲩ ⲛⲏⲓ ⲓⲥ ⲕⲉ ⲉ︦ ⲛ̀ϫⲓⲛϭⲱⲣ ⲁⲓϫ̀ⲫⲱⲟⲩ.
20 فَجَاءَ الَّذِي أَخَذَ الْخَمْسَ وَزَنَاتٍ وَقَدَّمَ خَمْسَ وَزَنَاتٍ أُخَرَ قَائِلًا: يا سَيِّدِي، خَمْسَ وَزَنَاتٍ أَعْطيتَنِي. هُوَذَا خَمْسُ وَزَنَاتٍ أُخَرُ رَبِحْتُهَا.
21 His lord said to him, ‘Well done, good and faithful servant; you were faithful over a few things, I will make you ruler over many things. Enter into the joy of your lord.’
Ⲡⲉϫⲉ ⲡⲉϥⲟ︦ⲥ︦ ⲇⲉ ⲛⲁϥ ϫⲉ ⲕⲁⲗⲱⲥ ⲡⲓⲃⲱⲕ ⲉⲑⲛⲁⲛⲉϥ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉⲧⲉⲛϩⲟⲧ ⲉ̀ⲡⲓⲇⲏ ⲁⲕϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲉⲕⲉⲛϩⲟⲧ ϧⲉⲛ ϩⲁⲛⲕⲟⲩϫⲓ ⲉⲓⲉ̀ⲭⲁⲕ ϩⲓϫⲉⲛ ϩⲁⲛⲛⲓϣϯ ⲙⲁϣⲉⲛⲁⲕ ⲉ̀ϧⲟⲩⲛ ⲉ̀ⲫ̀ⲣⲁϣⲓ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲡⲉⲕⲟ︦ⲥ︦.
21 فَقَالَ لَهُ سَيِّدُهُ: حَسنًا أيُّهَا الْعَبْدُ الصَّالِحُ وَالأمِينُ، كُنْتَ أمِينًا في الْقَلِيلِ فَأُقِيمُكَ عَلَى الْكَثِيرِ. اُدْخُلْ إِلَى فَرَحِ سَيِّدِكَ.
22 He also who had received two talents came and said, ‘Lord, you delivered to me two talents; look, I have gained two more talents besides them.’
Ⲁϥⲓ̀ ⲇⲉ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲫⲏⲉ̀ⲧⲁϥϭⲓ ⲙ̀ⲡⲓϫⲓⲛϭⲱⲣ ⲃ︦ ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ϫⲉ ⲡⲁⲟ︦ⲥ︦ ϫⲓⲛϭⲱⲣ ⲃ︦ ⲡⲉⲧⲁⲕⲧⲏⲓⲧⲟⲩ ⲛⲏⲓ ⲓⲥ ⲕⲉ ⲃ︦ ⲁⲓϫ̀ⲫⲱⲟⲩ.
22 ثُمَّ جَاءَ الَّذِي أَخَذَ الْوَزْنَتَيْنِ وَقَالَ: يا سَيِّدِي، وَزْنَتَيْنِ سَلَّمْتَنِي. هُوَذا وَزْنَتَانِ أُخْرَيَانِ رَبِحْتُهُمَا.
23 His lord said to him, ‘Well done, good and faithful servant; you have been faithful over a few things, I will make you ruler over many things. Enter into the joy of your lord.’
Ⲡⲉϫⲉ ⲡⲉϥⲟ︦ⲥ︦ ⲇⲉ ⲛⲁϥ ϫⲉ ⲕⲁⲗⲱⲥ ⲡⲓⲃⲱⲕ ⲉⲑⲛⲁⲛⲉϥ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉⲧⲉⲛϩⲟⲧ ⲉ̀ⲡⲓⲇⲏ ⲁⲕϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲉⲕⲉⲛϩⲟⲧ ϧⲉⲛ ϩⲁⲛⲕⲟⲩϫⲓ ⲉⲓⲉ̀ⲭⲁⲕ ϩⲓϫⲉⲛ ϩⲁⲛⲛⲓϣϯ ⲙⲁϣⲉⲛⲁⲕ ⲉ̀ϧⲟⲩⲛ ⲉ̀ⲫ̀ⲣⲁϣⲓ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲡⲉⲕⲟ︦ⲥ︦.
23 قَالَ لَهُ سَيِّدُهُ: نِعِمَّا أيُّهَا الْعَبْدُ الصَّالِحُ وَالأَمِينُ، كُنْتَ أَمِينًا في الْقَلِيلِ فَأُقِيمُكَ عَلَى الْكَثِيرِ. اُدْخُلْ إِلَى فَرَحِ سَيِّدِكَ.