Stand in the fear of God and listen to the Holy Gospel. A reading from the Gospel according to our teacher Saint Matthew the Evangelist, and the pure disciple. May his blessings be with us all.
قِفُوا بِخَوْفِ اللهِ، وَأَنْصِتُوا لِسَمَاعِ الإِنْجِيلِ الْمُقَدَّسِ. فَصْلٌ مِنْ بِشَارَةِ الإِنْجِيلِ لِمُعَلِّمِنَا مَارْ متى الْبَشِيرِ، التِّلْمِيذِ الطَّاهِرِ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
From the Psalms of our teacher David the prophet. May his blessings be with us all.
مِنْ مَزَامِيرِ تَرَاتِيلِ مُعَلِّمِنَا دَاوُدَ النَّبِيِّ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
Matins Psalm
المزمور
	Psalms 54:1, 14
(مزامير 54: 1, 14)
Hearken to my prayer, O God, And do not hide Yourself from my supplication. Attend to me, and hear me. I called upon God, And the Lord saved me.
Ϭⲓⲥ̀ⲙⲏ Ⲫϯ ⲉ̀ⲧⲁⲡⲣ̀ⲟⲥⲉⲩⲭⲏ: ⲙ̀ⲡⲉⲣϩⲓ ⲡ̀ϩⲟ ⲙ̀ⲡⲁⲧⲁⲧⲱⲃϩ: ⲙⲁϩ̀ⲑⲏⲕ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟⲓ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲥⲱⲧⲉⲙ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟⲓ: ⲁ̀ⲛⲟⲕ ⲇⲉ ⲁⲓⲱϣ ⲉ̀ⲡ̀ϣⲱⲓ ϩⲁ Ⲫϯ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁ̀Ⲡⲟ︦ⲥ︦ ⲥⲱⲧⲉⲙ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟⲓ: ⲁ︦ⲗ︦.
أَنْصِتْ يَا أللَّهُ لِصَلَاتِي، وَلَا تَغْفَلْ عَنْ تَضَرُّعِي، اِلْتَفِتْ إِليَّ وَاسْتَمِعْ مِنِّي. أَنَا صَرَخْتُ إِلَى اللَّهِ وَالرَّبُّ اِسْتَجَابَ لِي.
People:
Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
الليلويا.
	Psalm Trailer for the Pope or a Bishop
(Ⲙⲁⲣⲟⲩϭⲁⲥϥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲧ̀ⲉⲕⲕ̀ⲗⲏⲥⲓⲁ̀...)
People:
Amen Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲙⲏⲛ Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
امين الليلويا.
Then the introduction to the Gospel is read.
ثم تقال مقدمة الأنجيل وهي:
Reader:
Blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord. Our Lord, God, Savior and King of us all, Jesus Christ, Son of the living God to whom is glory forever. Amen.
القارﺉُ:
مباركٌ الآتي باسمِ الربِّ إلهِ القواتِ، ربُّنا وإلهُنا ومخلصُنا وملكُنا كلِّنا، يسوعُ المسيحُ، ابنُ اللهِ الحيِّ، الذي لهُ المجدُ إلى الأبدِ. آمين.
Matins Gospel
الإنجيل
	Matthew 20:1-16
(متى 20: 1-16)
1 “For the kingdom of heaven is like a landowner who went out early in the morning to hire laborers for his vineyard.
Ⲥ̀ⲟ̀ⲛⲓ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ϯⲙⲉⲧⲟⲩⲣⲟ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲛⲓⲫⲏⲟⲩⲓ̀ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩⲣⲱⲙⲓ ⲛ̀ⲛⲉⲃⲓⲟϩⲓ ⲉ̀ⲁϥⲓ̀ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ⲛ̀ϩⲁⲛⲁ̀ⲧⲟⲟⲩⲓ̀ ⲉ̀ⲧⲁϩⲟ ⲛ̀ϩⲁⲛⲉⲣⲅⲁⲧⲏⲥ ⲉ̀ⲡⲉϥⲓⲁϩⲁ̀ⲗⲟⲗⲓ.
1 يُشْبِهُ مَلَكُوتُ السَّمَاوَاتِ رَجُلًا رَبَّ بَيْتٍ خَرَجَ بِالْغَدَاةِ يَسْتَأْجِرُ فَعَلَةً لِكَرْمِهِ،
2 Now when he had agreed with the laborers for a denarius a day, he sent them into his vineyard.
Ⲁϥⲥⲉⲙⲛⲏⲧⲥ ⲇⲉ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲛⲓⲉⲣⲅⲁⲧⲏⲥ ⲉ̀ϯ ⲛⲱⲟⲩ ⲙ̀ⲡⲓⲉ̀ϩⲟⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩⲥⲁⲑⲉⲣⲓ ⲉ̀ⲫ̀ⲟⲩⲁⲓ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁϥⲟⲩⲟⲣⲡⲟⲩ ⲉ̀ⲡⲉϥⲓⲁϩⲁ̀ⲗⲟⲗⲓ.
2 فَشَارَطَ الْفَعَلَةَ عَلَى دِينَارٍ فِي الْيَوْمِ، وَأَرْسَلَهُمْ إِلَى كَرْمِهِ.
3 And he went out about the third hour and saw others standing idle in the marketplace,
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉ̀ⲧⲁϥⲓ̀ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ⲙ̀ⲫ̀ⲛⲁⲩ ⲛ̀ⲁϫⲡ ⲅ︦ ⲁϥⲛⲁⲩ ⲉ̀ϩⲁⲛⲕⲉⲭⲱⲟⲩⲛⲓ ⲉⲩⲟ̀ϩⲓ ⲉ̀ⲣⲁⲧⲟⲩ ϩⲓ ϯⲁ̀ⲅⲟⲣⲁ ⲉⲩⲕⲟⲣϥ.
3 ثُمَّ خَرَجَ فِي السَّاعَةِ الثَّالِثَةِ فَرَأَى آخَرِينَ وَاقِفِينَ فِي السُّوقِ بَطَّالِينَ،
4 and said to them, ‘You also go into the vineyard, and whatever is right I will give you.’ So they went.
Ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ⲛ̀ⲛⲓⲕⲉⲭⲱⲟⲩⲛⲓ ϫⲉ ⲙⲁϣⲉⲛⲱⲧⲉⲛ ϩⲱⲧⲉⲛ ⲉ̀ⲡⲓⲓⲁϩⲁ̀ⲗⲟⲗⲓ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲫⲏⲉⲧⲥⲉⲙⲡ̀ϣⲁ ϯⲛⲁⲧⲏⲓϥ ⲛⲱⲧⲉⲛ ⲛ̀ⲑⲱⲟⲩ ⲇⲉ ⲁⲩϣⲉⲛⲱⲟⲩ.
4 فَقَالَ لَهُمْ: اِمْضُوا أَنْتُمْ أَيْضًا إِلَى كَرْمِي وَأَنَا أُعْطِيكُمْ مَا يَحِقُّ لَكُمْ. فَمَضَوْا.
5 Again he went out about the sixth and the ninth hour, and did likewise.
Ⲡⲁⲗⲓⲛ ⲟⲛ ⲁϥⲓ̀ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ⲙ̀ⲫ̀ⲛⲁⲩ ⲛ̀ⲁϫⲡ ⲋ︦ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲫ̀ⲛⲁⲩ ⲛ̀ⲁϫⲡ ⲑ︦ ⲁϥⲓ̀ⲣⲓ ⲟⲛ ⲙ̀ⲡⲁⲓⲣⲏϯ.
5 وَخَرَجَ أَيْضًا نَحْوَ السَّاعَةِ السَّادِسَةِ وَنَحْوَ التَّاسِعَةِ فَصَنَعَ كَذَلِكَ.
6 And about the eleventh hour he went out and found others standing idle, and said to them, ‘Why have you been standing here idle all day?’
Ⲉ̀ⲧⲁϥⲓ̀ ⲇⲉ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ⲙ̀ⲫ̀ⲛⲁⲩ ⲛ̀ⲁϫⲡ ⲓ︦ⲁ︦ ⲁϥϫⲓⲙⲓ ⲛ̀ϩⲁⲛⲕⲉⲭⲱⲟⲩⲛⲓ ⲉⲩⲟ̀ϩⲓ ⲉ̀ⲣⲁⲧⲟⲩ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ⲛⲱⲟⲩ ϫⲉ ⲁ̀ϧⲱⲧⲉⲛ ⲧⲉⲧⲉⲛⲟ̀ϩⲓ ⲉ̀ⲣⲁⲧⲉⲛ ⲑⲏⲛⲟⲩ ⲙ̀ⲡⲁⲓⲙⲁ ⲙ̀ⲡⲓⲉ̀ϩⲟⲟⲩ ⲧⲏⲣϥ ⲉ̀ⲣⲉⲧⲉⲛⲕⲟⲣϥ.
6 وَخَرَجَ أَيْضًا نَحْوَ الْحَادِيَةَ عَشْرَةَ فَوَجَدَ آخَرِينَ وَاقِفِينَ، فَقَالَ لَهُمْ: مَا بَالُكُمْ وَاقِفِينَ هَهُنَا النَّهَارَ كُلَّهُ بَطَّالِينَ؟
7 They said to him, ‘Because no one hired us.’ He said to them, ‘You also go into the vineyard, and whatever is right you will receive.’
Ⲛ̀ⲑⲱⲟⲩ ⲇⲉ ⲡⲉϫⲱⲟⲩ ⲛⲁϥ ϫⲉ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉ ϩ̀ⲗⲓ ⲧⲁϩⲟⲛ ⲉ̀ⲫ̀ⲃⲉⲭⲉ ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ⲛⲱⲟⲩ ϫⲉ ⲙⲁϣⲉⲛⲱⲧⲉⲛ ϩⲱⲧⲉⲛ ⲉ̀ⲡⲓⲓⲁϩⲁ̀ⲗⲟⲗⲓ.
7 فَقَالُوا لَهُ: إِنَّهُ لَمْ يَسْتَأْجِرْنَا أَحَدٌ. فَقَالَ لَهُمْ: اِمْضُوا أَنْتُمْ أَيْضًا إِلَى كَرْمِي.
8 “So when evening had come, the owner of the vineyard said to his steward, ‘Call the laborers and give them their wages, beginning with the last to the first.’
Ⲉ̀ⲧⲁ ⲣⲟⲩϩⲓ ⲇⲉ ϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲡⲉϫⲉ Ⲡⲟ︦ⲥ︦ ⲙ̀ⲡⲓⲓⲁϩⲁ̀ⲗⲟⲗⲓ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉϥⲉ̀ⲡⲓⲧ̀ⲣⲟⲡⲟⲥ ϫⲉ ⲙⲟⲩϯ ⲉ̀ⲛⲓⲉⲣⲅⲁⲧⲏⲥ ⲙⲁ ⲟⲩⲃⲉⲭⲉ ⲛⲱⲟⲩ ⲉ̀ⲁⲕⲉⲣϩⲏⲧⲥ ⲓⲥϫⲉⲛ ⲛⲓϧⲁⲉⲩ ϣⲁ ⲛⲓϩⲟⲩⲁϯ.
8 فَلَمَّا كَانَ الْمَسَاءُ قَالَ رَبُّ الْكَرْمِ لِوَكِيلِهِ: اُدْعُ الْفَعَلَةَ وَأَعْطِهُمُ الْأُجْرَةَ مُبْتَدِئًا مِنَ الْآخِرِينَ إِلَى الْأَوَّلِينَ.
9 And when those came who were hired about the eleventh hour, they each received a denarius.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉ̀ⲧⲁⲩⲓ̀ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲛⲁ ϯⲁϫⲡ ⲓ︦ⲁ︦ ⲁⲩϭⲓ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩⲥⲁⲑⲉⲣⲓ ⲉ̀ⲫ̀ⲟⲩⲁⲓ.
9 فَجَاءَ أَصْحَابُ السَّاعَةِ الْحَادِيَةَ عَشْرَةَ فَأَخَذُوا كُلُّ وَاحِدٍ دِينَارًا.
10 But when the first came, they supposed that they would receive more; and they likewise received each a denarius.
Ⲉ̀ⲧⲁⲩⲓ̀ ⲇⲉ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲛⲓϩⲟⲩⲁϯ ⲛⲁⲩⲙⲉⲩⲓ ϫⲉ ⲥⲉⲛⲁϭⲓ ⲛ̀ϩⲟⲩⲟ̀ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛ̀ⲑⲱⲟⲩ ϩⲱⲟⲩ ⲁⲩϭⲓ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩⲥⲁⲑⲉⲣⲓ ⲉ̀ⲫ̀ⲟⲩⲁⲓ.
10 فَلَمَّا جَاءَ الْأَوَّلُونَ ظَنُّوا أَنَّهُمْ يَأْخُذُونَ أَكْثَرَ. فَأَخَذُوا أَيْضًا كُلُّ وَاحِدٍ دِينَارًا.
11 And when they had received it, they complained against the landowner,
Ⲉ̀ⲧⲁⲩϭⲓ ⲇⲉ ⲁⲩⲭ̀ⲣⲉⲙⲣⲉⲙ ⲛ̀ⲥⲁ ⲡⲓⲛⲉⲃⲓⲟϩⲓ.
11 وَفِيمَا هُمْ يَأْخُذُونَ تَذَمَّرُوا عَلَى رَبِّ الْبَيْتِ
12 saying, ‘These last men have worked only one hour, and you made them equal to us who have borne the burden and the heat of the day.’
Ⲉⲩϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ϫⲉ ⲛⲁⲓϧⲁⲉⲩ ⲟⲩⲟⲩⲛⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ⲉⲣϩⲱⲃ ⲡⲉⲧⲁⲩⲁⲓⲥ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁⲕⲁⲓⲧⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ϩⲩⲥⲟⲥ ⲛⲉⲙⲁⲛ ϧⲁ ⲛⲏⲉ̀ⲧⲁⲩϥⲁⲓ ⲙ̀ⲫ̀ⲃⲁⲣⲟⲥ ⲙ̀ⲡⲓⲉ̀ϩⲟⲟⲩ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲡⲓⲕⲁⲩⲥⲱⲛ.
12 قَائِلِينَ: إِنَّ هَؤُلَاءِ الْآخِرِينَ عَمِلُوا سَاعَةً وَاحِدَةً، فَجَعَلْتَهُمْ مُسَاوِينَ لَنَا وَنَحْنُ حَمَلْنَا ثِقَلَ النَّهَارِ وَحَرَّهُ!
13 But he answered one of them and said, ‘Friend, I am doing you no wrong. Did you not agree with me for a denarius?
Ⲛ̀ⲑⲟϥ ⲇⲉ ⲁϥⲉ̀ⲣⲟⲩⲱ̀ ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩⲁⲓ ⲙ̀ⲙⲱⲟⲩ ϫⲉ ⲡⲁϣ̀ⲫⲏⲣ ϯϭⲓ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲕ ⲛ̀ϫⲟⲛⲥ ⲁⲛ ⲙⲏ ⲟⲩⲥⲁⲑⲉⲣⲓ ⲁⲛ ⲡⲉⲧⲁⲓⲥⲉⲙⲛⲏⲧⲥ ⲛⲉⲙⲁⲕ.
13 فَأَجَابَ وَقَالَ لِوَاحِدٍ مِنْهُمْ: " يَا صَاحِ، مَا ظَلَمْتُكَ! أَمَا شَارَطْتُكَ عَلَى دِينَارٍ؟
14 Take what is yours and go your way. I wish to give to this last man the same as to you.
Ϯⲓ ⲙ̀ⲫⲏⲉ̀ⲧⲉⲫⲱⲕ ⲙⲁϣⲉⲛⲁⲕ ϯⲟⲩⲱϣ ⲇⲉ ⲉ̀ϯ ⲙ̀ⲡⲁⲓϧⲁⲉ̀ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉⲕⲣⲏϯ.
14 خُذْ مَا لَكَ وَامْضِ، فَإِنِّي أُرِيدُ أَنْ أُعْطِيَ هَذَا الْآخِرَ مِثْلَكَ.
15 Is it not lawful for me to do what I wish with my own things? Or is your eye evil because I am good?’
Ϣⲁⲛ ⲥ̀ϣⲉ ⲛⲏⲓ ⲉ̀ⲉⲣ ⲡⲉⲧⲉϩⲛⲏⲓ ϧⲉⲛ ⲛⲏⲉ̀ⲧⲉⲛⲟⲩⲓ̀ ϣⲁⲛ ⲡⲉⲕⲃⲁⲗ ⲛ̀ⲑⲟⲕ ϥ̀ϩⲱⲟⲩ ϫⲉ ⲁ̀ⲛⲟⲕ ⲟⲩⲁ̀ⲅⲁⲑⲟⲥ ⲁ̀ⲛⲟⲕ.
15 أَلَيْسَ لِي أَنْ أَفْعَلَ بِمَا لِي مَا أُرِيدُ؟ أَمْ عَيْنُكَ شِرِّيرَةٌ لِأَنِّي أَنَا صَالِحٌ؟
16 So the last will be first, and the first last. For many are called, but few chosen.”
Ⲡⲁⲓⲣⲏϯ ⲛⲓϧⲁⲉⲩ ⲉⲩⲉ̀ⲉⲣϣⲟⲣⲡ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛⲓϣⲟⲣⲡ ⲉⲩⲉ̀ⲉⲣϧⲁⲉ̀ ϩⲁⲛⲙⲏϣ ⲛⲏⲉⲧⲑⲁϩⲉⲙ ϩⲁⲛⲕⲟⲩϫⲓ ⲛⲏⲉⲧⲥⲱⲧⲡ.
16 فَعَلَى هَذَا الْمِثَالِ يَكُونُ الْآخِرُونَ أَوَّلِينَ وَالْأَوَّلُونَ آخِرِينَ. لِأَنَّ الْمَدْعُوِّينَ كَثِيرُونَ والْمُخْتَارِينَ قَلِيلُونَ ".