Prophecies
النبوآت
	Isaiah 1:19-2:2-3
(اشعياء 1: 19-2: 2-3)
A reading from Isaiah, the prophet. May his holy blessings be with us. Amen.
Ⲉⲃⲟⲗϧⲉⲛ Ⲏⲥⲁⲏ̀ⲁⲥ ⲡⲓⲡ̀ⲣⲟⲫⲏⲧⲏⲥ: ⲉ̀ⲣⲉⲡⲉϥⲥ̀ⲙⲟⲩ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ ϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲛⲉⲙⲁⲛ ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ ⲉϥϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ:
من اشعياء النبي بركته المقدسة تكون معنا. آمين.
19 If you are willing and obedient, You shall eat the good of the land;
19 إِنْ شِئْتُمْ وَسَمِعْتُمْ تَأْكُلُونَ خَيْرَ الْأَرْضِ.
20 But if you refuse and rebel, You shall be devoured by the sword”; For the mouth of the Lord has spoken.
20 وَإِنْ أَبَيْتُمُ وَتَمَرَّدْتُمْ تُؤْكَلُونَ بِالسَّيْفِ. لِأَنَّ فَمَ الرَّبِّ قَدْ تَكَلَّمَ.
21 How the faithful city has become a harlot! It was full of justice; Righteousness lodged in it, But now murderers.
21 كَيْفَ صَارَتْ صِهْيَوْنُ الْمَدِينَةُ الْأَمِينَةُ زَانِيَةً؟ قَدْ كَانَتْ مَمْلُوءَةً إِنْصَافًا وَفِيهَا كَانَ يَبِيتُ الْعَدْلُ، وَأَمَّا الْآنَ فَإِنَّمَا فِيهَا قَتَلَةٌ.
22 Your silver has become dross, Your wine mixed with water.
22 فِضَّتُكِ صَارَتْ زَغَلًا وَخَمْرُكِ مَغْشُوشَةً بِمَاءٍ.
23 Your princes are rebellious, And companions of thieves; Everyone loves bribes, And follows after rewards. They do not defend the fatherless, Nor does the cause of the widow come before them.
23 رُؤَسَاؤُكِ مُتَمِرِّدُونَ وَشُرَكَاءُ لِلُّصُوصِ، كُلُّ وَاحِدٍ مِنْهُمْ يُحِبُّ الرَّشْوَةَ وَيَتْبَعُ الْعَطَايَا، لَا يُنْصِفُونَ الْيَتِيمَ، وَدَعْوَى الْأَرْمَلَةِ لَا تَصِلُ إِلَيْهِمْ.
24 Therefore the Lord says, The Lord of hosts, the Mighty One of Israel, “Ah, I will rid Myself of My adversaries, And take vengeance on My enemies.
24 لِذَلِكَ يَقُولُ السَّيِّدُ رَبُّ الْجُنُودِ الْوَيْلُ لِأَقْوِيَاءِ إِسْرَائِيلَ، لَمْ يَزَلْ غَضَبِي عَلَى الَّذِينَ يُقَاوِمُونَنِي، وَأَنْتَقِمُ مِنْ أَعْدَائِي،
25 I will turn My hand against you, And thoroughly purge you, And I will destroy the rebellious, and will take away from you all transgressors .
25 وَأَرُدُّ يَدِي عَلَيْكِ، وَأَسْبِكُكِ بِطَهَارَةٍ. وَأُهْلِكُ غَيْرَ السَّامِعِينَ، وَأَنْزِعُ مِنْكِ كُلَّ آثَامِكِ وَجَمِيعَ الْمُتَعَظِّمِينَ.
26 I will restore your judges as at the first, And your counselors as at the beginning. Afterward you shall be called the city of righteousness, the faithful city.”
26 وَأُعِيدُ قُضَاتَكِ كَمَا فِي الأَوَّلِ، وَمُشِيرِيكِ كَمَا فِي الْبَدَاءَةِ. وَبَعْدَ ذَلِكَ تُدْعَيْنَ مَدِينَةَ الْعَدْلِ، الْقَرْيَةَ الْأَمِينَةَ.
27 Zion shall be redeemed with justice, And her penitents with righteousness.
27 تُفْتَدَى صِهْيَوْنُ بِالْإِنْصَافِ، وَالتَّائِبُونَ مِنْهَا بِالْعَدْلِ.
28 The destruction of transgressors and of sinners shall be together, And those who forsake the Lord shall be consumed.
28 وَالْعُصَاةُ وَالخُطاةُ يُحَطَّمُونَ جَمِيعًا. وَالَّذِينَ تَرَكُوا الرَّبَّ يُسْتَأْصَلُونَ.
29 For they shall be ashamed of the terebinth trees Which you have desired; And you shall be embarrassed because of the gardens Which you have chosen.
29 فَإِنَهُمْ يَخْجَلُونَ مِنَ الْأَصْنَامِ الَّتِي اِشْتَهَيْتُمُوهَا. وَتُخْزَوْنَ مِنَ الْجَنَّاتِ الَّتِي اِخْتَرْتُمُوهَا.
30 For you shall be as a terebinth whose leaf fades, And as a garden that has no water.
30 إِذْ تَصِيرُونَ كَبُطْمَةٍ قَدْ ذَبُلَ وَرَقُهَا، وَكَجَنَّةٍ لَا مَاءَ بِهَا.
31 The strong shall be as tinder, And the work of it as a spark; Both will burn together, And no one shall quench them.
31 وَيَصِيرُ الْقَوِّيُ كَالْمُشَاقَةِ وَعَمَلُهُ كَالشَّرَارَةِ، فَيَحْتَرِقَانِ كِلَاهُمَا مَعًا وَلَيْسَ مَنْ يُطْفِئُ.
2 Now it shall come to pass in the latter days That the mountain of the Lord’s house Shall be established on the top of the mountains, And shall be exalted above the hills; And all nations shall flow to it.
2 وَيَكُونُ فِي آخِرِ الْأَيَّامِ أَنَّ جَبَلَ بَيْتِ الرَّبِّ يَكُونُ ثَابِتًا فِي رَأْسِ الْجِبَالِ، وَيَرْتَفِعُ فَوْقَ التِّلَالِ، وَتَنْتَظِرُهُ جَمِيعُ الْأُمَمِ.
3 Many people shall come and say, “Come, and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, To the house of the God of Jacob; He will teach us His ways, And we shall walk in His paths.
3 وَيَنْطَلِقُ شُعُوبٌ كَثِيرُونَ، وَيَقُولُونَ: هَلُمُّوا نَصْعَدْ إِلَى جَبَلِ الرَّبِّ، إِلَى بَيْتِ إِلَهِ يَعْقُوبَ، وَهُوَ يُعَلِّمُنَا طُرُقَهُ فَنَسْلُكُ فِي سُبُلِهِ.
Glory be to the Holy Trinity, our God, forever and unto the ages of all ages. Amen.
Ⲟⲩⲱ̀ⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ϯⲧ̀ⲣⲓⲁⲥ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ Ⲡⲉⲛⲛⲟⲩϯ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛⲉⲙ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲛⲓⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲧⲏⲣⲟⲩ: ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ.
مجداً للثالوث القدوس إلهنا الى أبد الآبدين كلها آمين.
	Zechariah 8:7-13
(زكريا 8: 7-13)
A reading from Zechariah, the prophet. May his holy blessings be with us. Amen.
Ⲉⲃⲟⲗϧⲉⲛ Ⲍⲁⲭⲁⲣⲓⲁⲥ ⲡⲓⲡ̀ⲣⲟⲫⲏⲧⲏⲥ: ⲉ̀ⲣⲉⲡⲉϥⲥ̀ⲙⲟⲩ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ ϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲛⲉⲙⲁⲛ ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ ⲉϥϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ:
من زكريا النبي بركته المقدسة تكون معنا. آمين.
7 “Thus says the Lord of hosts: ‘Behold, I will save My people from the land of the east And from the land of the west;
7 هَذَا مَا يَقُولُهُ الرَّبُّ الضَّابِطُ الْكُلَّ: إِنِّي هَأَنَذَا أُخَلِّصُ شَعْبِي مِنْ أَرْضِ الْمَشَارِقِ وَمِنْ أَرْضِ مَغْرِبِ الشَّمْسِ.
8 I will bring them back, And they shall dwell in the midst of Jerusalem. They shall be My people And I will be their God, In truth and righteousness.’
8 وَآتِي بِهِمْ فَيَسْكُنُونَ فِي وَسَطِ أُورُشَلِيمَ، وَيَكُونُونَ لِي شَعْبًا، وَأَنَا أَكُونُ لَهُمْ إِلَهًا بِالْحُكْمِ وَالْعَدْلِ.
9 “Thus says the Lord of hosts: ‘Let your hands be strong, You who have been hearing in these days These words by the mouth of the prophets, Who spoke in the day the foundation was laid For the house of the Lord of hosts.
9 هَذَا مَا يَقُولُهُ الرَّبُّ الضَّابِطُ الْكُلَّ: فَلْتَتَشَدَّدْ أَيْدِيكُمْ أَيُّهَا السَّامِعُونَ فِي هَذِهِ الْأَيَّامِ هَذَا الْكَلَامُ مِنْ أَفْوَاهِ الْأَنْبِيَاءِ؛ لِأَنَّهُ مِنْ يَوْمَ وُضِعَ أَسَاسُ بَيْتِ اللَّهِ الضَّابِطِ الْكُلَّ.
10 For before these days There were no wages for man nor any hire for beast; There was no peace from the enemy for whoever went out or came in; For I set all men, everyone, against his neighbor.
10 وَمُنْذُ يَوْمَ بُنِيَ الْهَيْكَلُ فِي تِلْكَ الْأَيَّامِ أُجْرَةُ النَّاسِ لَمْ تَكُنْ تُشْبِعُهُمْ وأُجْرَةُ الْبَهَائِمِ لَا تَكُونُ، وَلَا سَلَامَ لِمَنْ دَخَلَ أَوْ خَرَجَ مِنْ قِبَلِ الضِّيقِ. وَأُرْسِلُ النَّاسَ كُلَّ وَاحِدٍ فَوَاحِدٍ إِلَى صَاحِبِهِ.
11 But now I will not treat the remnant of this people as in the former days,’ says the Lord of hosts.
11 أَمَّا الْآنَ فَلَا أَصْنَعُ بِبَقِيَّةِ شَعْبِي كَمِثْلِ الْأَيَّامِ الْأُولَى. قَالَ الرَّبُّ الْمُمْسِكُ الْكُلَّ.
12 ‘For the seed shall be prosperous, The vine shall give its fruit, The ground shall give her increase, And the heavens shall give their dew— I will cause the remnant of this people To possess all these.
12 إِنِّي مُعْطِي سَلَامَةً، فَتُعْطِي الْكَرْمَةُ ثَمَرَتَهَا، وَالْأَرْضُ تُعْطِي غَلَّتَهَا، وَالسَّمَاءُ تُعْطِي نَدَاهَا، وَأُمَلِّكُ بَقِيَّةَ هَذَا لِشَعْبِي هَذِهِ كُلَّهَا.
13 And it shall come to pass That just as you were a curse among the nations, O house of Judah and house of Israel, So I will save you, and you shall be a blessing. Do not fear, Let your hands be strong.’
13 وَيَكُونُ كَمَا أَنَّكُمْ كُنْتُمْ لَعْنَةً بَيْنَ الْأُمَمِ يَا بَيْتَ يَهُوذَا وَيَا بَيْتَ إِسْرَائِيلَ، كَذَلِكَ أُخَلِّصُكُمْ فَتَكُونُونَ بَرَكَةً فَلَا تَخَافُوا، وَلْتُشَدَّدْ أَيْدِيكُمْ.
Glory be to the Holy Trinity, our God, forever and unto the ages of all ages. Amen.
Ⲟⲩⲱ̀ⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ϯⲧ̀ⲣⲓⲁⲥ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ Ⲡⲉⲛⲛⲟⲩϯ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛⲉⲙ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲛⲓⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲧⲏⲣⲟⲩ: ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ.
مجداً للثالوث القدوس إلهنا الى أبد الآبدين كلها آمين.