Stand in the fear of God and listen to the Holy Gospel. A reading from the Gospel according to our teacher Saint Matthew the Evangelist, and the pure disciple. May his blessings be with us all.
قِفُوا بِخَوْفِ اللهِ، وَأَنْصِتُوا لِسَمَاعِ الإِنْجِيلِ الْمُقَدَّسِ. فَصْلٌ مِنْ بِشَارَةِ الإِنْجِيلِ لِمُعَلِّمِنَا مَارْ متى الْبَشِيرِ، التِّلْمِيذِ الطَّاهِرِ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
From the Psalms of our teacher David the prophet. May his blessings be with us all.
مِنْ مَزَامِيرِ تَرَاتِيلِ مُعَلِّمِنَا دَاوُدَ النَّبِيِّ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
Matins Psalm
المزمور
	Psalms 22:1, 2
(مزامير 22: 1, 2)
The Lord is my shepherd; I shall not want. He restores my soul; He leads me in the paths of righteousness.
Ⲡϭⲟⲓⲥ ⲡⲉⲑⲛⲁⲁ̀ⲙⲟⲛⲓ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲓ: ⲛ̀ⲛⲉϥⲑ̀ⲣⲓⲉⲣϧⲁⲉ̀ ⲛ̀ϩ̀ⲗⲓ: ⲁϥⲧⲁⲥⲑⲟ ⲛ̀ⲧⲁⲯⲩⲭⲏ ⲁϥϭⲓⲙⲱⲓⲧ ⲛⲏⲓ: ϧⲉⲛ ⲛⲓⲙⲱⲓⲧ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ϯⲙⲉⲑⲙⲏⲓ: ⲁ︦ⲗ︦.
الرب يرعاني فلا يعوزني شيءٌ. رَدَّ نفسي، وهداني إلى سُبل البرِّ.
People:
Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
الليلويا.
	Psalm Trailer for the Pope or a Bishop
(Ⲙⲁⲣⲟⲩϭⲁⲥϥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲧ̀ⲉⲕⲕ̀ⲗⲏⲥⲓⲁ̀...)
People:
Amen Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲙⲏⲛ Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
امين الليلويا.
Then the introduction to the Gospel is read.
ثم تقال مقدمة الأنجيل وهي:
Reader:
Blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord. Our Lord, God, Savior and King of us all, Jesus Christ, Son of the living God to whom is glory forever. Amen.
القارﺉُ:
مباركٌ الآتي باسمِ الربِّ إلهِ القواتِ، ربُّنا وإلهُنا ومخلصُنا وملكُنا كلِّنا، يسوعُ المسيحُ، ابنُ اللهِ الحيِّ، الذي لهُ المجدُ إلى الأبدِ. آمين.
Matins Gospel
الإنجيل
	Matthew 9:10-15
(متى 9: 10-15)
10 Now it happened, as Jesus sat at the table in the house, that behold, many tax collectors and sinners came and sat down with Him and His disciples.
Ⲉϥⲣⲱⲧⲉⲃ ⲇⲉ ϧⲉⲛ ⲡ̀ⲏⲓ ⲛ̀Ⲥⲓⲙⲱⲛ ⲓⲥ ϩⲁⲛⲙⲏϣ ⲛ̀ⲣⲉϥⲉⲣⲛⲟⲃⲓ ⲛⲉⲙ ϩⲁⲛⲧⲉⲗⲱⲛⲏⲥ ⲁⲩⲓ̀ ⲁⲩⲣⲟⲑⲃⲟⲩ ⲛⲉⲙ Ⲓⲏ︦ⲥ︦ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲛⲉϥⲙⲁⲑⲏⲧⲏⲥ.
10 وَبَيْنَمَا هُوَ مُتَّكِئٌ فِي الْبَيْتِ، إذَا خُطَاةٌ وَعَشَّارُونَ كَثِيرُونَ قَدْ جَاءُوا وَاتَّكَأُوا مَعَ يَسُوعَ وَتَلَامِيذِهِ.
11 And when the Pharisees saw it, they said to His disciples, “Why does your Teacher eat with tax collectors and sinners?”
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉ̀ⲧⲁⲩⲛⲁⲩ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲛⲓⲪⲁⲣⲓⲥⲉⲟⲥ ⲛⲁⲩϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ⲛ̀ⲛⲉϥⲙⲁⲑⲏⲧⲏⲥ ϫⲉ ⲉⲑⲃⲉ ⲟⲩ ⲡⲉⲧⲉⲛⲣⲉϥϯⲥ̀ⲃⲱ ⲉϥⲟⲩⲱⲙ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲛⲓⲧⲉⲗⲱⲛⲏⲥ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲛⲓⲣⲉϥⲉⲣⲛⲟⲃⲓ.
11 فَلَمَّا رَأَى الفَرِّيسِيُّونَ ذلِكَ قَالُوا لِتَلَامِيذِهِ: " لِمَاذا يَأْكُلُ مُعَلِّمُكُمْ مَعَ العَشَّارِينَ وَالْخُطَاةِ؟ ".
12 When Jesus heard that, He said to them, “Those who are well have no need of a physician, but those who are sick.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉ̀ⲧⲁϥⲥⲱⲧⲉⲙ ⲇⲉ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ Ⲓⲏ︦ⲥ︦ ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ⲛⲱⲟⲩ ϫⲉ ⲛⲏⲉⲧϫⲟⲣ ⲥⲉⲉⲣⲭ̀ⲣⲓⲁ̀ ⲁⲛ ⲙ̀ⲡⲓⲥⲏⲓⲛⲓ ⲁⲗⲗⲁ ⲛⲏⲉⲑⲙⲟⲕϩ.
12 فَلَمَّا سَمِعَ يَسُوعُ قَالَ لَهُمْ: " لَا يَحْتَاجُ الأقْوِيَاءُ إِلَى الطَّبِيبِ بَلِ الْمَرْضَى.
13 But go and learn what this means: ‘I desire mercy and not sacrifice.’ For I did not come to call the righteous, but sinners, to repentance.”
Ⲙⲁϣⲉⲛⲱⲧⲉⲛ ⲇⲉ ⲁ̀ⲣⲓⲉ̀ⲙⲓ ϫⲉ ⲟⲩ ⲡⲉ ⲟⲩⲛⲁⲓ ⲡⲉϯⲟⲩⲁϣϥ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩϣⲟⲩϣⲱⲟⲩϣⲓ ⲁⲛ ⲛⲉⲧⲁⲓⲓ̀ ⲅⲁⲣ ⲁⲛ ⲉ̀ⲑⲁϩⲉⲙ ⲛⲓⲑ̀ⲙⲏⲓ ⲁⲗⲗⲁ ⲛⲓⲣⲉϥⲉⲣⲛⲟⲃⲓ ⲉⲩⲙⲉⲧⲁⲛⲟⲓⲁ̀.
13 فَاذْهَبُوا وَتَعَلَّمُوا مَا هُوَ: إنِّي أُرِيدُ رَحْمَةً لَا ذَبِيحَةً، لأَنِّي لَمْ آتِ لأَدْعُـوَ الأبْـرَارَ بَـلِ الْخُطَـاةَ إِلَى التَّوْبَـةِ ".
14 Then the disciples of John came to Him, saying, “Why do we and the Pharisees fast often, but Your disciples do not fast?”
Ⲧⲟⲧⲉ ⲁⲩⲓ̀ ϩⲁⲣⲟϥ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲛⲓⲙⲁⲑⲏⲧⲏⲥ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ Ⲓⲱⲁⲛⲛⲏⲥ ⲉⲩϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ϫⲉ ⲉⲑⲃⲉ ⲟⲩ ⲁ̀ⲛⲟⲛ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲛⲓⲪⲁⲣⲓⲥⲉⲟⲥ ⲧⲉ̀ⲛⲉⲣⲛⲏⲥⲧⲉⲩⲓⲛ ⲛ̀ϩⲁⲛⲙⲏϣ ⲛⲉⲕⲙⲁⲑⲏⲧⲏⲥ ⲇⲉ ⲛ̀ⲑⲱⲟⲩ ⲥⲉⲉⲣⲛⲏⲥⲧⲉⲩⲓⲛ ⲁⲛ.
14 حِينَئِذٍ أَتَى إِلَيْهِ تَلَامِيذُ يُوحَنَّا قَائِلِينَ: " لِمَاذَا نَحْنُ وَالْفَرِّيسِيُّونَ نَصُومُ كَثِيرًا، وَتَلَامِيذُكَ لَا يَصُومُونَ؟ ".
15 And Jesus said to them, “Can the friends of the bridegroom mourn as long as the bridegroom is with them? But the days will come when the bridegroom will be taken away from them, and then they will fast.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲡⲉϫⲉ Ⲓⲏ︦ⲥ︦ ⲛⲱⲟⲩ ϫⲉ ⲙⲏ ⲟⲩⲟⲛϣ̀ϫⲟⲙ ⲛ̀ⲛⲓϣⲏⲣⲓ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲡⲓⲡⲁⲧϣⲉⲗⲉⲧ ⲉ̀ⲉⲣϩⲏⲃⲓ ϩⲟⲥ ⲉϥⲛⲉⲙⲱⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲡⲓⲡⲁⲧϣⲉⲗⲉⲧ ⲥⲉⲛⲏⲟⲩ ⲇⲉ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ϩⲁⲛⲉ̀ϩⲟⲟⲩ ⲉ̀ϣⲱⲡ ⲁⲩϣⲁⲛⲱ̀ⲗⲓ ⲙ̀ⲡⲓⲡⲁⲧϣⲉⲗⲉⲧ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ϩⲁⲣⲱⲟⲩ ⲧⲟⲧⲉ ⲉⲩⲉ̀ⲉⲣⲛⲏⲥⲧⲉⲩⲓⲛ.
15 فَقَالَ لَهُمْ يَسُوعُ: " هَلْ يَسْتَطِيعُ بَنُو الْعُرْسِ أَنْ يَنُوحُوا مَا دَامَ الْعَرِيسُ مَعَهُمْ؟ وَلكِنْ سَتَأْتِي أَيَّامٌ حِينَ يُرْفَعُ الْعَرِيسُ عَنْهُمْ، فَحِينَئِذٍ يَصُومُونَ ".