Stand in the fear of God and listen to the Holy Gospel. A reading from the Gospel according to our teacher Saint Matthew the Evangelist, and the pure disciple. May his blessings be with us all.
قِفُوا بِخَوْفِ اللهِ، وَأَنْصِتُوا لِسَمَاعِ الإِنْجِيلِ الْمُقَدَّسِ. فَصْلٌ مِنْ بِشَارَةِ الإِنْجِيلِ لِمُعَلِّمِنَا مَارْ متى الْبَشِيرِ، التِّلْمِيذِ الطَّاهِرِ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
From the Psalms of our teacher David the prophet. May his blessings be with us all.
مِنْ مَزَامِيرِ تَرَاتِيلِ مُعَلِّمِنَا دَاوُدَ النَّبِيِّ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
Matins Psalm
المزمور
	Psalms 118:39
(مزامير 118: 39)
You are my portion, O Lord; I have said that I would keep Your words. I entreated Your favor with my whole heart; Be merciful to me according to Your word.
Ⲛ̀ⲑⲟⲕ ⲡⲉ ⲧⲁⲧⲟⲓ Ⲡⲟ︦ⲥ︦: ⲁⲓϫⲟⲥ ⲉ̀ⲁ̀ⲣⲉϩ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉⲕⲉⲛⲧⲟⲗⲏ: ⲁⲓϯϩⲟ ⲉ̀ⲡⲉⲕϩⲟ ϧⲉⲛ ⲡⲁϩⲏⲧ ⲧⲏⲣϥ: ⲛⲁⲓ ⲛⲏⲓ ⲕⲁⲧⲁ ⲡⲉⲕⲥⲁϫⲓ: ⲁ︦ⲗ︦.
أَنْتَ حَظِّي يَا رَبُّ. فَقُلْتُ أَنْ أَحْفَظَ وَصَايَاَكَ. تَوَسَّلْتُ إِلَى وَجْهِكَ بِكُلِّ قَلْبِي. اِرْحَمْنِي كَقَوْلِكَ.
People:
Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
الليلويا.
	Psalm Trailer for the Pope or a Bishop
(Ⲙⲁⲣⲟⲩϭⲁⲥϥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲧ̀ⲉⲕⲕ̀ⲗⲏⲥⲓⲁ̀...)
People:
Amen Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲙⲏⲛ Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
امين الليلويا.
Then the introduction to the Gospel is read.
ثم تقال مقدمة الأنجيل وهي:
Reader:
Blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord. Our Lord, God, Savior and King of us all, Jesus Christ, Son of the living God to whom is glory forever. Amen.
القارﺉُ:
مباركٌ الآتي باسمِ الربِّ إلهِ القواتِ، ربُّنا وإلهُنا ومخلصُنا وملكُنا كلِّنا، يسوعُ المسيحُ، ابنُ اللهِ الحيِّ، الذي لهُ المجدُ إلى الأبدِ. آمين.
Matins Gospel
الإنجيل
	Matthew 5:25-37
(متى 5: 25-37)
25 Agree with your adversary quickly, while you are on the way with him, lest your adversary deliver you to the judge, the judge hand you over to the officer, and you be thrown into prison.
Ϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲉⲕⲕⲁϯ ⲉ̀ⲡⲉⲕⲁⲛⲧⲓⲇⲓⲕⲟⲥ ⲛ̀ⲭⲱⲗⲉⲙ ϩⲟⲥ ⲉⲕⲭⲏ ⲛⲉⲙⲁϥ ϩⲓ ⲡⲓⲙⲱⲓⲧ ⲙⲏ ⲡⲟⲧⲉ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲡⲓⲁⲛⲧⲓⲇⲓⲕⲟⲥ ⲧⲏⲓⲕ ⲉ̀ⲡⲓⲕ̀ⲣⲓⲧⲏⲥ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲡⲓⲕ̀ⲣⲓⲧⲏⲥ ⲧⲏⲓⲕ ⲉ̀ⲡⲓϩⲩⲡⲏⲣⲉⲧⲏⲥ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛ̀ⲥⲉϩⲓⲧⲕ ⲉ̀ⲡⲓϣ̀ⲧⲉⲕⲟ.
25 كُنْ مُرَاضِيًا لِخَصْمِكَ سَرِيعًا مَا دُمْتَ مَعَهُ فِي الطَّرِيقِ، لِئَلَّا يُسَلِّمَكَ الْخَصْمُ إِلَى الْقَاضِي، وَيُسَلِّمَكَ الْقَاضِي إِلَى الشُّرَطِيِّ، فَتُلْقَى فِي السِّجْنِ.
26 Assuredly, I say to you, you will by no means get out of there till you have paid the last penny.
Ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ ϯϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ⲛⲁⲕ ϫⲉ ⲛ̀ⲛⲉⲕⲓ̀ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ⲙ̀ⲙⲁⲩ ϣⲁⲧⲉⲕϯ ⲛ̀ⲧ̀ϧⲁⲉ̀ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉⲃⲓ.
26 اَلْحَقَّ أَقُولُ لَكَ: لاَ تَخْرُجُ مِنْ هُنَاكَ حَتَّى تُوفِيَ الْفَلْسَ الأَخِيرَ!
27 “You have heard that it was said to those of old, ‘You shall not commit adultery.’
Ⲁ̀ⲣⲉ̀ⲧⲉⲧⲉⲛⲥⲱⲧⲉⲙ ϫⲉ ⲁⲩϫⲟⲥ ⲛ̀ⲛⲓⲁⲣⲭⲉⲟⲥ ϫⲉ ⲛ̀ⲛⲉⲕⲉⲣⲛⲱⲓⲕ.
27 «قَدْ سَمِعْتُمْ أَنَّهُ قِيلَ لِلْقُدَمَاءِ: لاَ تَزْنِ.
28 But I say to you that whoever looks at a woman to lust for her has already committed adultery with her in his heart.
Ⲁ̀ⲛⲟⲕ ⲇⲉ ϯϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ⲛⲱⲧⲉⲛ ϫⲉ ⲟⲩⲟⲛ ⲛⲓⲃⲉⲛ ⲉⲑⲛⲁϫⲟⲩϣⲧ ⲛ̀ⲥⲁ ⲟⲩⲥ̀ϩⲓⲙⲓ ⲉ̀ⲡ̀ϫⲓⲛⲉⲣⲉⲡⲓⲑⲩⲙⲓⲛ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟⲥ ⲁϥⲕⲏⲛ ⲉϥⲟⲓ ⲛ̀ⲛⲱⲓⲕ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟⲥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲡⲉϥϩⲏⲧ.
28 وَأَمَّا أَنَا فَأَقُولُ لَكُمْ: إِنَّ كُلَّ مَنْ يَنْظُرُ إِلَى امْرَأَةٍ لِيَشْتَهِيَهَا فَقَدْ زَنَى بِهَا فِي قَلْبِهِ.
29 If your right eye causes you to sin, pluck it out and cast it from you; for it is more profitable for you that one of your members perish, than for your whole body to be cast into hell.
Ⲓⲥϫⲉ ⲡⲉⲕⲃⲁⲗ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩⲓ̀ⲛⲁⲙ ⲉⲣⲥ̀ⲕⲁⲛⲇⲁⲗⲓⲍⲉⲥⲑⲉ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲕ ⲫⲟⲣⲕϥ ϩⲓⲧϥ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗϩⲁⲣⲟⲕ ⲥ̀ⲉⲣⲛⲟϥⲣⲓ ⲅⲁⲣ ⲛⲁⲕ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲟⲩⲁⲓ ⲛ̀ⲛⲉⲕⲙⲉⲗⲟⲥ ⲧⲁⲕⲟ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉϣ̀ⲧⲉⲙ ⲡⲉⲕⲥⲱⲙⲁ ⲧⲏⲣϥ ϣⲉⲛⲁϥ ⲉ̀ϯⲅⲉⲉⲛⲛⲁ.
29 فَإِنْ كَانَتْ عَيْنُكَ الْيُمْنَى تُعْثِرُكَ فَاقْلَعْهَا وَأَلْقِهَا عَنْكَ لأَنَّهُ خَيْرٌ لَكَ أَنْ يَهْلِكَ أَحَدُ أَعْضَائِكَ وَلاَ يُلْقَى جَسَدُكَ كُلُّهُ فِي جَهَنَّمَ.
30 And if your right hand causes you to sin, cut it off and cast it from you; for it is more profitable for you that one of your members perish, than for your whole body to be cast into hell.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲓⲥϫⲉ ⲧⲉⲕϫⲓϫ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩⲓ̀ⲛⲁⲙ ⲉⲣⲥ̀ⲕⲁⲛⲇⲁⲗⲓⲍⲓⲛ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲕ ϫⲟϫⲥ ϩⲓⲧⲥ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗϩⲁⲣⲟⲕ ⲥ̀ⲉⲣⲛⲟϥⲣⲓ ⲅⲁⲣ ⲛⲁⲕ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲟⲩⲁⲓ ⲛ̀ⲛⲉⲕⲙⲉⲗⲟⲥ ⲧⲁⲕⲟ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉϣ̀ⲧⲉⲙ ⲡⲉⲕⲥⲱⲙⲁ ⲧⲏⲣϥ ϣⲉⲛⲁϥ ⲉ̀ϯⲅⲉⲉⲛⲛⲁ.
30 وَإِنْ كَانَتْ يَدُكَ الْيُمْنَى تُعْثِرُكَ فَاقْطَعْهَا وَأَلْقِهَا عَنْكَ، لِأَنَّهُ خَيْرٌ لَكَ أَنْ يَهْلِكَ أَحَدُ أَعْضَائِكَ وَلَا يُلْقَى جَسَدُكَ كُلُّهُ فِي جَهَنَّمَ.
31 “Furthermore it has been said, ‘Whoever divorces his wife, let him give her a certificate of divorce.’
Ⲁⲩϫⲟⲥ ϫⲉ ⲫⲏⲉⲑⲛⲁϩⲓ ⲧⲉϥⲥ̀ϩⲓⲙⲓ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ⲙⲁⲣⲉϥϯ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩⲥ̀ϧⲓ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩⲉⲓ ⲛⲁⲥ.
31 «وَقِيلَ: مَنْ طَلَّقَ امْرَأَتَهُ فَلْيُعْطِهَا كِتَابَ طَلاَقٍ
32 But I say to you that whoever divorces his wife for any reason except sexual immorality causes her to commit adultery; and whoever marries a woman who is divorced commits adultery.
Ⲁ̀ⲛⲟⲕ ⲇⲉ ϯϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ⲛⲱⲧⲉⲛ ϫⲉ ⲫⲏⲉⲑⲛⲁϩⲓ ⲧⲉϥⲥ̀ϩⲓⲙⲓ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩⲉ̀ϣⲉⲛⲥⲁϫⲓ ⲙ̀ⲡⲟⲣⲛⲓⲁ̀ ⲁϥⲑ̀ⲣⲟ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ⲉ̀ϫ̀ⲫⲉ ⲛⲱⲓⲕ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲫⲏⲉⲑⲛⲁϭⲓ ⲛ̀ⲑⲏⲉⲧϩⲱⲟⲩⲓ̀ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ϥ̀ⲟⲓ ⲛ̀ⲛⲱⲓⲕ.
32 وَأَمَّا أَنَا فَأَقُولُ لَكُمْ: إِنَّ مَنْ طَلَّقَ امْرَأَتَهُ إِلاَّ لِعِلَّةِ الزِّنَى يَجْعَلُهَا تَزْنِي وَمَنْ يَتَزَوَّجُ مُطَلَّقَةً فَإِنَّهُ يَزْنِي.
33 “Again you have heard that it was said to those of old, ‘You shall not swear falsely, but shall perform your oaths to the Lord.’
Ⲡⲁⲗⲓⲛ ⲁ̀ⲣⲉⲧⲉⲛⲥⲱⲧⲉⲙ ϫⲉ ⲁⲩϫⲟⲥ ⲛ̀ⲛⲓⲁⲣⲭⲉⲟⲥ ϫⲉ ⲛ̀ⲛⲉⲕⲱⲣⲕ ⲛ̀ⲛⲟⲩϫ ⲉⲕⲉ̀ϯ ⲇⲉ ⲛ̀ⲛⲉⲕⲁ̀ⲛⲁⲩϣ ⲙ̀Ⲡⲟ︦ⲥ︦.
33 أَيْضًا سَمِعْتُمْ أَنَّهُ قِيلَ لِلْقُدَمَاءِ: لَا تَحْنَثْ، بَلْ أَوْفِ لِلرَّبِّ أَقْسَامَكَ.
34 But I say to you, do not swear at all: neither by heaven, for it is God’s throne;
Ⲁ̀ⲛⲟⲕ ⲇⲉ ϯϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ⲛⲱⲧⲉⲛ ϫⲉ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉⲣⲱⲣⲕ ϩⲟⲗⲱⲥ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉⲣⲱⲣⲕ ⲛ̀ⲧ̀ⲫⲉ ϫⲉ ⲡⲓⲑ̀ⲣⲟⲛⲟⲥ ⲙ̀Ⲫϯ ⲡⲉ.
34 وَأمَّا أَنَا فَأَقُولُ لَكُمْ: لَا تَحْلِفُوا أَلْبَتَّةَ، لَا تَحْلِفُوا بِالسَّمَاءِ لِأَنَّهَا عَرْشُ اللَّهِ،
35 nor by the earth, for it is His footstool; nor by Jerusalem, for it is the city of the great King.
Ⲟⲩⲇⲉ ⲡ̀ⲕⲁϩⲓ ϫⲉ ⲫ̀ⲙⲁⲛ̀ⲥⲉⲙⲛⲓ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲛⲉϥϭⲁⲗⲁⲩϫ ⲡⲉ ⲟⲩⲇⲉ Ⲓⲗ︦ⲏ︦ⲙ︦ ϫⲉ ⲑ̀ⲃⲁⲕⲓ ⲙ̀ⲡⲓⲛⲓϣϯ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩⲣⲟ ⲧⲉ.
35 وَلَا بِالْأَرْضِ لِأَنَّهَا مَوْطِئُ قَدَمَيْهِ، وَلَا بِأُورُشَلِيمَ لِأَنَّهَا مَدِينَةُ الْمَلِكِ الْعَظِيمِ.
36 Nor shall you swear by your head, because you cannot make one hair white or black.
Ⲟⲩⲇⲉ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉⲣⲱⲣⲕ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉⲕⲁ̀ⲫⲉ ϫⲉ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲛϣ̀ϫⲟⲙ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲕ ⲉ̀ⲉⲣ ⲟⲩⲕⲁⲡ ⲛ̀ϥⲱⲓ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩⲱⲃϣ ⲓⲉ ⲟⲩⲁⲓ ⲛ̀ⲭⲁⲙⲉ.
36 وَلَا تَحْلِفْ بِرَأْسِكَ، لِأَنَّكَ لَا تَقْدِرُ أَنْ تَجْعَلَ شَعْرَةً وَاحِدَةً بَيْضَاءَ أَوْ سَوْدَاءَ.
37 But let your ‘Yes’ be ‘Yes,’ and your ‘No,’ ‘No.’ For whatever is more than these is from the evil one.
Ⲙⲁⲣⲉ ⲡⲉⲧⲉⲛⲥⲁϫⲓ ⲇⲉ ⲉⲣ ⲟⲩⲁ̀ϩⲁ ⲁ̀ϩⲁ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲛ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲛ ⲡ̀ϩⲟⲩⲟ ⲇⲉ ⲛ̀ⲛⲁⲓ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗϧⲉⲛ ⲡⲓⲡⲉⲧϩⲱⲟⲩ ⲡⲉ.
37 فَلْيَكُنْ كَلَامُكُمْ: نَعَمْ نَعَمْ، وَلَا لَا. وَمَا زَادَ عَلَى ذَلِكَ فَهُوَ مِنَ الشِّرِّيرِ.