Stand in the fear of God and listen to the Holy Gospel. A reading from the Gospel according to our teacher Saint Luke the Evangelist, and the pure disciple. May his blessings be with us all.
قِفُوا بِخَوْفِ اللهِ، وَأَنْصِتُوا لِسَمَاعِ الإِنْجِيلِ الْمُقَدَّسِ. فَصْلٌ مِنْ بِشَارَةِ الإِنْجِيلِ لِمُعَلِّمِنَا مَارْ لوقا الْبَشِيرِ، التِّلْمِيذِ الطَّاهِرِ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
From the Psalms of our teacher David the prophet. May his blessings be with us all.
مِنْ مَزَامِيرِ تَرَاتِيلِ مُعَلِّمِنَا دَاوُدَ النَّبِيِّ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
Matins Psalm
المزمور
	Psalms 85:13
(مزامير 85: 13)
O God, transgressors have risen up against me, and an assembly of violent men have sought my life;
Ⲫϯ ϩⲁⲛⲡⲁⲣⲁⲛⲟⲙⲟⲥ ⲡⲉⲧⲁⲩⲧⲱⲟⲩⲛⲟⲩ ⲉ̀ϩ̀ⲣⲏⲓ ⲉ̀ϫⲱⲓ: ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲟⲩⲥⲩⲛⲁⲅⲱⲅⲏ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ϩⲁϫⲱⲣⲓ: ⲁⲥⲕⲱϯ ⲛ̀ⲥⲁ ⲧⲁⲯⲩⲭⲏ: ⲁ︦ⲗ︦.
اللَّهُمَّ إِنَّ مُخَالِفِي النَّامُوسِ، قَدْ قَامُوا عَلَيَّ. وَمَجْمَعُ الْمُعْتَزِّينَ، طَلَبُوا نَفْسِي.
People:
Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
الليلويا.
	Psalm Trailer for the Pope or a Bishop
(Ⲙⲁⲣⲟⲩϭⲁⲥϥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲧ̀ⲉⲕⲕ̀ⲗⲏⲥⲓⲁ̀...)
People:
Amen Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲙⲏⲛ Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
امين الليلويا.
Then the introduction to the Gospel is read.
ثم تقال مقدمة الأنجيل وهي:
Reader:
Blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord. Our Lord, God, Savior and King of us all, Jesus Christ, Son of the living God to whom is glory forever. Amen.
القارﺉُ:
مباركٌ الآتي باسمِ الربِّ إلهِ القواتِ، ربُّنا وإلهُنا ومخلصُنا وملكُنا كلِّنا، يسوعُ المسيحُ، ابنُ اللهِ الحيِّ، الذي لهُ المجدُ إلى الأبدِ. آمين.
Matins Gospel
الإنجيل
	Luke 9:37-43
(لوقا 9: 37-43)
37 Now it happened on the next day, when they had come down from the mountain, that a great multitude met Him.
Ⲁⲥϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲇⲉ ⲉ̀ⲡⲉϥⲣⲁⲥϯ ⲉⲧⲁⲩⲓ̀ ⲉ̀ϧ̀ⲣⲏⲓ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ϩⲓ ⲡⲓⲧⲱⲟⲩ ⲁⲩⲓ̀ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ϩⲁⲣⲟϥ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲩⲛⲓϣϯ ⲙ̀ⲙⲏϣ.
37 وَفِي الْيَوْمِ التَّالِي فِيمَا هُمْ نَازِلُونَ مِنَ الْجَبَلِ، اسْتَقْبَلَهُ جَمْعٌ كَثِيرٌ.
38 Suddenly a man from the multitude cried out, saying, “Teacher, I implore You, look on my son, for he is my only child.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ϩⲏⲡⲡⲉ ⲓⲥ ⲟⲩⲣⲱⲙⲓ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ϧⲉⲛ ⲡⲓⲙⲏϣ ⲁϥⲱϣ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ϫⲉ ⲡⲓⲣⲉϥϯⲥ̀ⲃⲱ ϯ ϩⲟ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟⲕ ϫⲟⲩϣⲧ ⲉ̀ⲡⲁϣⲏⲣⲓ ϫⲉ ⲩϣⲏⲣⲓ ⲙ̀ⲙⲁⲩⲁⲧϥ ⲛⲏⲓ ⲡⲉ.
38 وَإذَا بِرَجُلٍ مِنَ الْجَمْعِ صَاحَ قَائِلًا: " يَا مُعَلِّمُ، أَتَوَّسَلُ إِلَيْكَ، أَنْ تَنْظُرَ إِلَى ابْنِي، فَإِنَّهُ وَحِيدٌ لِي.
39 And behold, a spirit seizes him, and he suddenly cries out; it convulses him so that he foams at the mouth; and it departs from him with great difficulty, bruising him.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ϩⲏⲡⲡⲉ ϥ̀ⲛⲏⲟⲩ ⲉ̀ϫⲱϥ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲟⲩⲡⲛ︦ⲁ︦ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩϩⲟϯ ϧⲉⲛ ⲟⲩϩⲟϯ ϥ̀ⲱϣ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ϥ̀ϣ̀ⲑⲟⲣⲧⲉⲣ ⲙⲙⲟϥ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ϥ̀ⲣⲱϧⲧ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟϥ ⲉ̀ϧ̀ⲣⲏⲓ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲣⲱϥ ϫⲉϣ ⲥ̀ⲫⲏⲓϯ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲙⲟⲅⲓⲥ ϣⲁϥϣⲉ ⲛⲁϥ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ϩⲁⲣⲟϥ ⲉϥϧⲟⲙϧⲉⲙ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟϥ.
39 وَإِنَّ رُوحًا يَأْخُذُهُ فَيَصْرُخُ بَغْتَةً، فَيَخبِطُهُ فَيُزْبِدُ، وَلَا يَكَادُ يُفَارِقُهُ وَهُوَ يُرَضِّضُهُ.
40 So I implored Your disciples to cast it out, but they could not.”
Ⲩⲟϩ ⲓϯϩⲟ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉⲕⲙⲁⲑⲏⲧⲏⲥ ϩⲓⲛⲁ ⲛ̀ⲧⲟⲩϩⲓⲧϥ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲙ̀ⲡⲟⲩϣ̀ϫⲉⲙϫⲟⲙ.
40 وَقَدْ سَأَلْتُ تَلَامِيذَكَ أَنْ يُخْرِجُوهُ فَلَمْ يَسْتَطِيعُوا.
41 Then Jesus answered and said, “O faithless and perverse generation, how long shall I be with you and bear with you? Bring your son here.”
Ⲁϥⲉⲣⲟⲩⲱ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ Ⲓⲏ︦ⲥ︦ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ϫⲉ ⲱ ⲡⲓϫⲱⲟⲩ ⲛⲁⲑⲛⲁϩϯ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉⲧⲫⲟⲛϩ ϣⲁ ⲑ̀ⲛⲁⲩ ϯⲛⲁϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲛⲉⲙⲱⲧⲉⲛ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲁⲉⲣⲁⲛⲉⲭ ⲉⲥⲑⲉ ⲙ̀ⲙⲱⲧⲉⲛ ⲁⲛⲓ̀ ⲡⲉⲕϣⲏⲣⲓ ⲛⲏⲓ ⲙ̀ⲛⲁⲓ.
41 فَأَجَابَ يَسُوعُ وَقَالَ: " أَيُّهَا الْجِيلُ غَيْرُ الْمُؤْمِنِ وَالْمُلْتَوِي، إِلَى مَتَى أَكُونُ مَعَكُمْ وَأَحْتَمِلُكُمْ؟ قَدِّمِ اِبْنَكَ إِلَيَّ هَهُنَا ".
42 And as he was still coming, the demon threw him down and convulsed him. Then Jesus rebuked the unclean spirit, healed the child, and gave him back to his father.
Ⲉⲧⲓ ϥⲛⲏⲟⲩ ⲉ̀ϧⲟⲩⲛ ϩⲁⲣⲟϥ ⲁϥⲣⲁϧⲧϥ ⲉ̀ϧ̀ⲣⲏⲓ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲡⲓⲇⲉⲙⲱⲛ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁϥϣ̀ⲧⲉⲣⲑⲱⲣϥ Ⲓⲏ︦ⲥ︦ ⲇⲉ ⲁϥⲉⲣⲉⲡⲓⲧⲓⲙⲁⲛ ⲙ̀ⲡⲓⲇⲉⲙⲱⲛ ⲛ̀ⲁⲕⲁⲑⲁⲣⲧⲟⲛ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ϥⲧⲟⲩϫⲉ ⲡⲓⲁ̀ⲗⲟⲩ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁϥⲧⲏⲓϥ ⲉ̀ⲡⲉϥⲓⲱⲧ.
42 وَفِيمَا هُوَ يَدْنُو صَرَعَهُ الشَّيْطَانُ وَخَبَطَهُ، فَانْتَهَرَ يَسُوعُ الرُّوحَ النَّجِسَ، وَأَبْرَأَ الصَّبِيَّ وَسَلَّمَهُ إِلَى أَبِيهِ.
43 And they were all amazed at the majesty of God. But while everyone marveled at all the things which Jesus did.
Ⲛⲁϥⲉⲣϣ̀ⲫⲏⲣⲓ ⲧⲏⲣⲟⲩ ⲉ̀ϫⲉⲛ ϯⲙⲉⲑⲛⲓϣϯ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲫϯ ⲉⲩⲉⲣϣ̀ⲫⲏⲣⲓ ⲇⲉ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲟⲩⲟⲛ ⲛⲓⲃⲉⲛ ⲉϩ̀ⲣⲏⲓ ⲉ̀ϫⲉⲛ ϩⲱⲃ ⲛⲓⲃⲉⲛ ⲉ̀ⲛⲁϥⲓ̀ⲣⲓ ⲙ̀ⲙⲱⲟⲩ.
43 فَبُهِتَ الْجَمِيعُ مِنْ عَظَمَةِ اللَّهِ. إِذْ كَانُوا مُتَعَجِّبِينَ جَمِيعًا مِنْ كُلِّ مَا فَعَلَ.