Stand in the fear of God and listen to the Holy Gospel. A reading from the Gospel according to our teacher Saint Mark the Evangelist, and the pure disciple. May his blessings be with us all.
قِفُوا بِخَوْفِ اللهِ، وَأَنْصِتُوا لِسَمَاعِ الإِنْجِيلِ الْمُقَدَّسِ. فَصْلٌ مِنْ بِشَارَةِ الإِنْجِيلِ لِمُعَلِّمِنَا مَارْ مرقس الْبَشِيرِ، التِّلْمِيذِ الطَّاهِرِ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
From the Psalms of our teacher David the prophet. May his blessings be with us all.
مِنْ مَزَامِيرِ تَرَاتِيلِ مُعَلِّمِنَا دَاوُدَ النَّبِيِّ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
Matins Psalm
المزمور
	Psalms 96:11
(مزامير 96: 11)
Light is sown for the righteous, And gladness for the upright in heart. Rejoice in the Lord, you righteous, And give thanks at the remembrance of His holy name.
Ⲟⲩⲟⲩⲱⲓⲛⲓ ⲁϥϣⲁⲓ ⲛ̀ⲛⲓⲑ̀ⲙⲏⲓ: ⲛⲉⲙ ⲟⲩⲟⲩⲛⲟϥ ⲛ̀ⲛⲏⲉⲧⲥⲟⲩⲧⲱⲛ ϧⲉⲛ ⲡⲟⲩϩⲏⲧ: ⲟⲩⲛⲟϥ ⲛⲓⲑ̀ⲙⲏⲓ ϧⲉⲛ Ⲡ̀ⲟ︦ⲥ︦: ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲟⲩⲱⲛϩ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ⲙ̀ⲫ̀ⲙⲉⲩⲓ̀ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲧⲉϥⲙⲉⲧⲁ̀ⲅⲓⲟⲥ. Ⲁ︦ⲗ︦.
نُورٌ أَشْرَقَ لِلصِّدِّيقِينَ، وَفَرَحٌ لِلْمُسْتَقِيمِينَ بِقَلْبِهِمْ. اِفْرَحُوا أَيُّهَا الصِّدِّيقُونَ بِالرَّبِّ، وَاعْتَرِفُوا لِذِكْرِ قُدْسِهِ. هَلِّلُويَا.
People:
Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
الليلويا.
	Psalm Trailer for the Pope or a Bishop
(Ⲙⲁⲣⲟⲩϭⲁⲥϥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲧ̀ⲉⲕⲕ̀ⲗⲏⲥⲓⲁ̀...)
People:
Amen Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲙⲏⲛ Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
امين الليلويا.
Then the introduction to the Gospel is read.
ثم تقال مقدمة الأنجيل وهي:
Reader:
Blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord. Our Lord, God, Savior and King of us all, Jesus Christ, Son of the living God to whom is glory forever. Amen.
القارﺉُ:
مباركٌ الآتي باسمِ الربِّ إلهِ القواتِ، ربُّنا وإلهُنا ومخلصُنا وملكُنا كلِّنا، يسوعُ المسيحُ، ابنُ اللهِ الحيِّ، الذي لهُ المجدُ إلى الأبدِ. آمين.
Matins Gospel
الإنجيل
	Mark 6:35-44
(مرقس 6: 35-44)
35 When the day was now far spent, His disciples came to Him and said, “This is a deserted place, and already the hour is late.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ϩⲏⲇⲏ ⲉ̀ⲧⲁ ⲟⲩⲛⲓϣϯ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩⲛⲟⲩ ϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲉ̀ⲧⲁⲩⲓ̀ ϩⲁⲣⲟϥ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲛⲉϥⲙⲁⲑⲏⲧⲏⲥ ⲛⲁⲩϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ϫⲉ ⲡⲓⲙⲁ ⲟⲩϣⲁϥⲉ ⲡⲉ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ϩⲏⲇⲏ ϯⲟⲩⲛⲟⲩ ⲁⲥⲥⲓⲛⲓ.
35 وَبَعْدَ سَاعَاتٍ كَثِيرَةٍ تَقَدَّمَ إِلَيْهِ تَلَامِيذُهُ وَقَالُوا: " الْمَوْضِعُ قَفْرٌ وَالْوَقْتُ قَدْ مَضَى.
36 Send them away, that they may go into the surrounding country and villages and buy themselves bread; for they have nothing to eat.”
Ⲭⲁⲩ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ϩⲓⲛⲁ ⲛ̀ⲧⲟⲩϣⲉⲛⲱⲟⲩ ⲉ̀ⲛⲓⲓⲟϩⲓ ⲉⲧⲕⲱϯ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲛⲓϯⲙⲓ ⲛ̀ⲧⲟⲩϣⲱⲡ ⲛⲱⲟⲩ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉⲧⲟⲩⲛⲁⲟⲩⲟⲙϥ.
36 اِصْرِفْهُمْ لِكَيْ يَمْضُوا إِلَى الْحُقُولِ الْمُحِيطَةِ وَالْقُرَى؛ لِيَبْتَاعُوا لَهُمْ مَا يَأْكُلُونَهُ ".
37 But He answered and said to them, “You give them something to eat.” And they said to Him, “Shall we go and buy two hundred denarii worth of bread and give them something to eat?”
Ⲛ̀ⲑⲟϥ ⲇⲉ ⲁϥⲉ̀ⲣⲟⲩⲱ̀ ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ⲛⲱⲟⲩ ϫⲉ ⲙⲟⲓ ⲛⲱⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ⲑⲱⲧⲉⲛ ⲙⲁⲣⲟⲩⲟⲩⲱⲙ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲡⲉϫⲱⲟⲩ ⲛⲁϥ ϫⲉ ⲧⲉⲛⲛⲁϣⲉⲛⲁⲛ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉⲛϣⲉⲡ ⲥ︦ ⲛ̀ⲥⲁⲑⲉⲣⲓ ⲛ̀ⲱⲓⲕ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉⲛϯ ⲛⲱⲟⲩ ⲉ̀ⲟⲩⲱⲙ.
37 أَمَّا هُوَ فَأَجَابَ وَقَالَ لَهُمْ: " أَعْطُوهُمْ أَنْتُمْ لِيَأْكُلُوا ". فَقَالُوا لَهُ: " أَنَمْضِي وَنَبْتَاعُ خُبْزًا بِمِئَتَيْ دِينَارٍ وَنُعْطِيْهِمْ لِيَأْكُلُوا؟ "
38 But He said to them, “How many loaves do you have? Go and see.” And when they found out they said, “Five, and two fish.”
Ⲛⲑⲟϥ ⲇⲉ ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ⲛⲱⲟⲩ ϫⲉ ⲟⲩⲟⲛ ⲟⲩⲏⲣ ⲛ̀ⲱⲓⲕ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉⲛ ⲑⲏⲛⲟⲩ ⲙⲁϣⲉⲛⲱⲧⲉⲛ ⲁ̀ⲛⲁⲩ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉ̀ⲧⲁⲩⲉ̀ⲙⲓ ⲡⲉϫⲱⲟⲩ ϫⲉ ⲉ︦ ⲛ̀ⲱⲓⲕ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲧⲉⲃⲧ ⲃ︦.
38 فَقَالَ لَهُمْ: " كَمْ رَغِيفًا عِنْدَكُمْ؟ اِذْهَبُوا وَانْظُرُوا ". وَلَمَّا عَلِمُوا قَالُوا لَهُ: " خَمْسَةُ أَرْغِفَةٍ وَسَمَكَتَانِ ".
39 Then He commanded them to make them all sit down in groups on the green grass.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁϥⲟⲩⲁϩⲥⲁϩⲛⲓ ⲛⲱⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲟⲩⲣⲱⲧⲉⲃ ⲧⲏⲣⲟⲩ ⲥⲓⲙⲡⲟⲥⲓⲟⲛ ⲥⲓⲙⲡⲟⲥⲓⲟⲛ ϩⲓϫⲉⲛ ⲡⲓⲥⲓⲙ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲉⲧⲟⲩⲱⲧ.
39 فَأَمَرَهُمْ أَنْ يُتْكِئُوا الْجَمْعَ فِرَقًا فِرَقًا عَلَى الْعُشْبِ الْأَخْضَرِ.
40 So they sat down in ranks, in hundreds and in fifties.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁⲩⲣⲱⲧⲉⲃ ⲧⲏⲣⲟⲩ ⲙ̀ⲙⲁ ⲙⲁ ⲕⲁⲧⲁ ⲣ︦ ⲣ︦ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲕⲁⲧⲁ ⲛ︦ ⲛ︦.
40 فَاتَّكَأُوا جَمِيعًا فِي أَمَاكِنَ نَحْوَ: مِئَةٍ مِئَةٍ وَخَمْسِينَ خَمْسِينَ.
41 And when He had taken the five loaves and the two fish, He looked up to heaven, blessed and broke the loaves, and gave them to His disciples to set before them; and the two fish He divided among them all.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉ̀ⲧⲁϥϭⲓ ⲙ̀ⲡⲓ ⲉ︦ ⲛ̀ⲱⲓⲕ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲡⲓⲧⲉⲃⲧ ⲃ︦ ⲁϥϫⲟⲩϣⲧ ⲉ̀ⲡ̀ϣⲱⲓ ⲉ̀ⲧ̀ⲫⲉ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁϥⲥ̀ⲙⲟⲩ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁϥⲫⲱϣ ⲛ̀ⲛⲓⲱⲓⲕ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁϥϯ ⲛ̀ⲛⲓⲙⲁⲑⲏⲧⲏⲥ ϩⲓⲛⲁ ⲛ̀ⲧⲟⲩⲭⲱ ⲛⲁϩⲣⲁⲩ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲡⲓⲕⲉⲧⲉⲃⲧ ⲃ︦ ⲁϥⲫⲁϣⲟⲩ ⲉ̀ϩ̀ⲣⲁⲩ ⲧⲏⲣⲟⲩ.
41 فَأَخَذَ الْأَرْغِفَةَ الْخَمْسَةَ وَالسَّمَكَتَيْنِ، وتَطَلَّعَ نَحْوَ السَّمَاءِ، وَبَارَكَ ثُمَّ قَسَّمَ الْأَرْغِفَةَ، وَأَعْطَى التَّلَامِيذَ لِيَضَعُوا أَمَامَهُمْ، وَالسَّمَكَتَانِ أَيْضًا قَسَّمَهُما أَمَامَ الْجَمِيعِ،
42 So they all ate and were filled.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁⲩⲟⲩⲱⲙ ⲧⲏⲣⲟⲩ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁⲩⲥⲓ.
42 فَأَكَلَ الْجَمِيعُ وَشَبِعُوا.
43 And they took up twelve baskets full of fragments and of the fish.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁⲩⲱ̀ⲗⲓ ⲙ̀ ⲓ︦ⲃ︦ ⲛ̀ⲕⲟⲧ ⲛ̀ⲗⲁⲕϩ ⲉⲩⲙⲉϩ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗϧⲉⲛ ⲛⲓⲕⲉⲧⲉⲃⲧ.
43 ثُمَّ رَفَعُوا اثْنَتَيْ عَشْرَةَ قُفَّةً مَمْلُوءَةً مِنَ الْكِسَرِ، وَمِنَ السَّمَكِ أَيْضًا.
44 Now those who had eaten the loaves were about five thousand men.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛⲏⲉ̀ⲛⲁⲩⲟⲩⲱⲙ ⲛ̀ⲛⲓⲱⲓⲕ ⲛⲁⲩⲉⲣ ⲉ︦ ⲛ̀ϣⲟ ⲛ̀ⲣⲱⲙⲓ.
44 وَكَانَ الَّذِينَ أَكَلُوا مِنَ الْأَرْغِفَةِ نَحْوَ خَمْسَةِ آلَافِ رَجُلٍ.