Prophecies
النبوآت
	Proverbs 10:17-32
(أمثال 10: 17-32)
A reading from the Proverbs of Solomon the prophet. May his holy blessings be with us. Amen.
Ⲉⲃⲟⲗϧⲉⲛ ⲛⲓⲡⲁⲣⲟⲓⲙⲓⲁ̀ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ Ⲥⲟⲗⲟⲙⲱⲛ ⲡⲓⲡ̀ⲣⲟⲫⲏⲧⲏⲥ: ⲉ̀ⲣⲉⲡⲉϥⲥ̀ⲙⲟⲩ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ ϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲛⲉⲙⲁⲛ ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ ⲉϥϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ:
من أمثال سليمان النبي بركته المقدسة تكون معنا. آمين.
17 He who keeps instruction is in the way of life, But he who refuses correction goes astray.
17 مَنْ حَفِظَ التَّأْدِيبَ فَهُوَ فِي سَبِيلِ الْحَيَاةِ، وَمَنْ أَهْمَلَ التَّوْبِيخَ فَهُوَ ضَالٌّ.
18 Whoever hides hatred has lying lips, And whoever spreads slander is a fool.
18 مَنْ يُخْفِي الْبُغْضَةَ فَشَفَتَاهُ كَاذِبَتَانِ، وَمَنْ جَاهَرَ بِالْقَدْحِ فَهُوَ جَاهِلٌ.
19 In the multitude of words sin is not lacking, But he who restrains his lips is wise.
19 كَثْرَةُ الْكَلَامِ لَا تَخْلُو مِنْ مَعْصِيَةٍ، أَمَّا الضَّابِطُ شَفَتَيْهِ فَهُوَ عَاقِلٌ.
20 The tongue of the righteous is choice silver; The heart of the wicked is worth little.
20 لِسَانُ الصِّدِّيقِ فِضَّةٌ مُخْتَارَةٌ. وَقُلُوبُ الْمُنَافِقِينَ كَشَيْءٍ خَسْيسٍ.
21 The lips of the righteous feed many, But fools die for lack of wisdom.
21 شَفَتَا الصِّدِّيقِ تَهْدِيَانِ كَثِيرِينَ، أَمَّا الْأَغْبِيَاءُ فَيَمُوتُونَ مِنْ نَقْصِ الْفَهْمِ.
22 The blessing of the Lord makes one rich, And He adds no sorrow with it.
22 بَرَكَةُ الرَّبِّ تُغْنِي، وَلَا يُضَافُ إِلَيْهَا أَلَمٌ.
23 To do evil is like sport to a fool, But a man of understanding has wisdom.
23 فِعْلُ الرَّذِيلَةِ عِنْدَ الْجَاهِلِ كَاللَّعِبِ، أَمَّا الْحِكْمَةُ فَلِذِي الْفَهْمِ.
24 The fear of the wicked will come upon him, And the desire of the righteous will be granted.
24 خَوْفُ الْمُنَافِقِ يَحِلُّ عَلَيْهِ، وَبُغْيَةُ الصِّدِّيقِينَ تُعْطَى لَهُمْ.
25 When the whirlwind passes by, the wicked is no more, But the righteous has an everlasting foundation.
25 كَمَا تَمْضِي الزَّوْبَعَةُ يَزُولُ الْمُنَافِقُ. أَمَّا الصِّدِّيقُ فَأَسَاسٌ مُؤَبَّدٌ.
26 As vinegar to the teeth and smoke to the eyes, So is the lazy man to those who send him.
26 كَالْخَلِّ لِلْأَسْنَانِ، وَالدُّخَانِ لِلْعَيْنَيْنِ، كَذَلِكَ الْكَسْلَانُ لِمَنْ أَرْسَلَهُ.
27 The fear of the Lord prolongs days, But the years of the wicked will be shortened.
27 مَخَافَةُ الرَّبِّ تَزِيدُ الْأَيَّامَ، أَمَّا سِنُو الْمُنَافِقِينَ فَتَقْصُرُ.
28 The hope of the righteous will be gladness, But the expectation of the wicked will perish.
28 أَمَلُ الصِّدِّيقِينَ فَرَحٌ، وَرَجَاءُ الْمُنَافِقِينَ يَهْلِكُ.
29 The way of the Lord is strength for the upright, But destruction will come to the workers of iniquity.
29 طَرِيقُ الرَّبِّ حِصْنٌ لِلسَّلِيمِ. وَالْهَلَاكُ لِفَاعِلِي الْإِثْمِ.
30 The righteous will never be removed, But the wicked will not inhabit the earth.
30 الصِّدِّيقُ لَا يَتَزَعْزَعُ إِلَى الْأَبَدِ. وَالْمُنَافِقُونَ لَا يَسْكُنُونَ الْأَرْضَ.
31 The mouth of the righteous brings forth wisdom, But the perverse tongue will be cut out.
31 فَمُ الصِّدِّيقِ يُنْبِتُ الْحِكْمَةَ، وَلِسَانُ الْخَدَائِعِ يُقْطَعُ.
32 The lips of the righteous know what is acceptable, But the mouth of the wicked what is perverse.
32 شَفَتَا الصِّدِّيقِ تَعْلَمَانِ الْمَرْضِيَّ، وَأَفْوَاهُ الْمُنَافِقِينَ تَعْلَمُ الْخَدَائِعَ.
Glory be to the Holy Trinity, our God, forever and unto the ages of all ages. Amen.
Ⲟⲩⲱ̀ⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ϯⲧ̀ⲣⲓⲁⲥ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ Ⲡⲉⲛⲛⲟⲩϯ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛⲉⲙ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲛⲓⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲧⲏⲣⲟⲩ: ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ.
مجداً للثالوث القدوس إلهنا الى أبد الآبدين كلها آمين.
	Isaiah 49:6-10
(اشعياء 49: 6-10)
A reading from Isaiah, the prophet. May his holy blessings be with us. Amen.
Ⲉⲃⲟⲗϧⲉⲛ Ⲏⲥⲁⲏ̀ⲁⲥ ⲡⲓⲡ̀ⲣⲟⲫⲏⲧⲏⲥ: ⲉ̀ⲣⲉⲡⲉϥⲥ̀ⲙⲟⲩ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ ϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲛⲉⲙⲁⲛ ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ ⲉϥϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ:
من اشعياء النبي بركته المقدسة تكون معنا. آمين.
6 I will also give You as a light to the Gentiles, That You should be My salvation to the ends of the earth.’”
6 إِنِّي قَدْ جَعَلْتُكَ نُورًا لِلْأُمَمِ لِتَكُونَ خَلَاصِي إِلَى أَقَاصِي الْأَرْضِ.
7 Thus says the Lord, The Redeemer of Israel, their Holy One, To Him whom man despises, To Him whom the nation abhors, To the Servant of rulers: “Kings shall see and arise, Princes also shall worship, Because of the Lord who is faithful, The Holy One of Israel; And He has chosen You.”
7 هَكَذَا قَالَ الرَّبُّ فَادِي إِسْرَائِيلَ وَقُدُّوسُهُ، لِلْمُهَانِ النَّفْسِ، لِمَكْرُوهِ الْأُمَّةِ، لِعَبْدِ الْمُتَسَلِّطِينَ: إِنَّ الْمُلُوكَ يَنْظُرُونَ وَيَقُومُونَ، وَالرُّؤَسَاءَ يَسْجُدُونَ، لِأَجْلِ الرَّبِّ الْأَمِينِ، وَقُدُّوسِ إِسْرَائِيلَ الَّذِي اِخْتَارَكَ.
8 Thus says the Lord: “In an acceptable time I have heard You, And in the day of salvation I have helped You; I will preserve You and give You As a covenant to the people, To restore the earth, To cause them to inherit the desolate heritages;
8 هَكَذَا قَالَ الرَّبُّ إِنِّي اِسْتَجَبْتُ لَكَ فِي وَقْتٍ مَرْضِيٍّ. وَأَعَنْتُكَ فِي يَوْمِ الْخَلَاصِ، وَحَفِظْتُكَ وَجَعَلْتُكَ عَهْدًا لِلشَّعْبِ، لِتُقِيمَ الْأَرْضَ، وَتُوَرِّثَ الْمَوَارِيثَ الْمُدَمَّرَةَ.ِّ
9 That You may say to the prisoners, ‘Go forth,’ To those who are in darkness, ‘Show yourselves.’ “They shall feed along the roads, And their pastures shall be on all desolate heights.
9 لِتَقُولَ لِلْأَسْرَى: " اخْرُجُوا ". وَلِلَّذِينَ فِي الظُّلْمَةِ: " اِظْهَرُوا ". فَيَرْعَوْنَ فِي الطُّرِقِ، وَيَكُونُ مَرْعَاهُمْ فِي كُلِّ الرَّوَابِي.
10 They shall neither hunger nor thirst, Neither heat nor sun shall strike them; For He who has mercy on them will lead them, Even by the springs of water He will guide them.
10 لَا يَجُوعُونَ وَلَا يَعْطَشُونَ، وَلَا يَقْرَعُهُمُ الْحَرُّ وَلَا الشَّمْسُ، لِأَنَّ رَاحِمَهُمْ يَهْدِيهِمْ وَإِلَى يَنَابِيعِ الْمِيَاهِ يُورِدُهُمْ.
Glory be to the Holy Trinity, our God, forever and unto the ages of all ages. Amen.
Ⲟⲩⲱ̀ⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ϯⲧ̀ⲣⲓⲁⲥ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ Ⲡⲉⲛⲛⲟⲩϯ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛⲉⲙ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲛⲓⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲧⲏⲣⲟⲩ: ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ.
مجداً للثالوث القدوس إلهنا الى أبد الآبدين كلها آمين.
	Job 38:37-39:30
(ايوب 38: 37-39: 30)
A reading from Job the righteous. May his holy blessings be with us. Amen.
Ⲉⲃⲟⲗϧⲉⲛ Ⲓⲱⲃ Ⲡⲓⲑ̀ⲙⲏⲓ: ⲉ̀ⲣⲉⲡⲉϥⲥ̀ⲙⲟⲩ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ ϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲛⲉⲙⲁⲛ ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ ⲉϥϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ:
من ايوب الصديق بركته المقدسة تكون معنا. آمين.
37 Who can number the clouds by wisdom? Or who can pour out the bottles of heaven,
37 مَنْ يُحْصِي الْغُيُومَ بِحِكْمَتِهِ؟ وَمَنْ يَسْكُبُ زِقَاقَ السَّمَاوَاتِ،
38 When the dust hardens in clumps, And the clods cling together?
38 إِذْ يَتَلَبَّدُ التُّرَابُ وَيَتَلَاصَقُ الْمَدَرُ؟
39 “Can you hunt the prey for the lion, Or satisfy the appetite of the young lions,
39 أَتَصْطَادُ لِلَّبُؤَةِ فَرِيسَتَهَا، وَتُشْبِعُ نُفُوسَ أَشْبَالِهَا،
40 When they crouch in their dens, Or lurk in their lairs to lie in wait?
40 حِينَ تُرْبِضُ فِي الْعَرَائِنِ وَتَقْعُدُ فِي أَجَمَتِهَا كَامِنَةً؟
41 Who provides food for the raven, When its young ones cry to God, And wander about for lack of food?
41 مَنْ يَرْزُقُ الْغُرَابَ صَيْدَهُ، إِذْ تَنْعَبُ فِرَاخُهُ إِلَى اللَّهِ، وَتَهِيمُ لِعَوَزِ الْقُوتِ؟
1 “Do you know the time when the wild mountain goats bear young? Or can you mark when the deer gives birth?
1 هَلْ عَلِمْتَ مَتَى تَلِدُ أَوْعَالُ الصُّخُورِ. أَمْ رَقَبْتَ نَتَاجَ الْأَيَائِلِ؟
2 Can you number the months that they fulfill? Or do you know the time when they bear young?
2 هَلْ حَسَبْتَ أَشْهُرَ حَمْلِهُنَّ، وَعَلِمْتَ أَوَانَ وَضْعِهُنَّ؟
3 They bow down, They bring forth their young, They deliver their offspring.
3 يَبْرُكْنَ وَيَضَعْنَ أَوْلَادَهُنَّ. وَيَدْفَعْنَ مَخَاضَهُنَّ.
4 Their young ones are healthy, They grow strong with grain; They depart and do not return to them.
4 ثُمَّ تَكْبَرُ أَوْلَادُهُنَّ. وَتُرَبَّى فِي الْبَرِّ. تَخْرُجُ وَلَا تَعُودُ إِلَيْهِنَّ.
5 “Who set the wild donkey free? Who loosed the bonds of the onager,
5 مَنْ أَطْلَقَ سَرَاحَ الْفَرَاءِ، وَمَنْ حَلَّ وُثُقَ حِمَارِ الْوَحْشِ؟
6 Whose home I have made the wilderness, And the barren land his dwelling?
6 جَعَلْتُ الصَّحْرَاءَ بَيْتَهُ وَالسِّبَاخَ مَسَاكِنَهُ.
7 He scorns the tumult of the city; He does not heed the shouts of the driver.
7 يَضْحَكُ عَلَى جَلَبَةِ الْمُدُنِ. وَلَا يَسْمَعُ زَجْرَ الْمُسَخِّرِ.
8 The range of the mountains is his pasture, And he searches after every green thing.
8 دَائِرَةُ الْجِبَالِ مَرْعَاهُ، وَعَلَى كُلِّ خُضْرَةٍ يُفَتِّشُ.
9 “Will the wild ox be willing to serve you? Will he bed by your manger?
9 أَيَرْضَى الثَّوْرُ الْوَحْشِيُّ أَنْ يَخْدُمَكَ، أَمْ يَبِيتُ عِنْدَ مَعْلَفِكَ؟
10 Can you bind the wild ox in the furrow with ropes? Or will he plow the valleys behind you?
10 أَتَرْبِطُ الثَّوْرَ الْوَحْشِيَّ بِربَاطِهِ فِي خَطِّ الْمِحْرَاثِ، أَمْ يُمَهِّدُ الْأَوْدِيَةَ وَرَاءَكَ؟
11 Will you trust him because his strength is great? Or will you leave your labor to him?
11 أَتَتَّكِلُ عَلَى قُوَّتِهِ الْعَظِيمَةِ، وَتُفَوِّضُ إِلَيْهِ أَعْمَالَكَ؟
12 Will you trust him to bring home your grain, And gather it to your threshing floor?
12 أَتَأْتَمِنُهُ أَنْ يَسْتَغِلَّ مَا زَرَعْتَ وَيَجْمَعُ بَيْدَرَكَ؟
13 “The wings of the ostrich wave proudly, But are her wings and pinions like the kindly stork’s?
13 أَجَنَاحُ النَّعَامَةِ الْمُرَفْرِفُ مِثْلُ جَنَاحِ اللَّقْلَقِ أَوْ الْبَازِي؟
14 For she leaves her eggs on the ground, And warms them in the dust;
14 فَإِنَّهَا تَتْرُكُ بَيْضَهَا عَلَى الْأَرْضِ وَتَحْضُنُهُ عَلَى التُّرَابِ.
15 She forgets that a foot may crush them, Or that a wild beast may break them.
15 وَتَنْسَى أَنَّ الرِّجْلَ تَطَأُهُ، وَأَنَّ وَحْشَ الصَّحْرَاءِ يَشْدَخُهُ.
16 She treats her young harshly, as though they were not hers; Her labor is in vain, without concern,
16 تَقْسُو عَلَى أَوْلَادِهَا كَأَنَّهَا لَيْسَتْ لَهَا. فَيَضِيعُ تَعَبُهَا بِلَا أَسَفٍ،
17 Because God deprived her of wisdom, And did not endow her with understanding.
17 لِأَنَّ اللَّهَ أَذْهَبَ عَنْهَا الْحِكْمَةَ، وَلَمْ يَرْزُقْهَا الْفَهْمَ.
18 When she lifts herself on high, She scorns the horse and its rider.
18 لَكِنْ إِذَا خَفَقَتْ بِجَنَاحَيْهَا إِلَى الْعَلُوِّ، تَضْحَكُ عَلَى الْفَرَسِ وَرَاكِبِهِ.
19 “Have you given the horse strength? Have you clothed his neck with thunder?
19 أَأَنْتَ الَّذِي يُؤْتِي الْفَرَسَ قُوَّةً، وَيُقَلِّدُ عُنُقَهُ رَعْدًا،
20 Can you frighten him like a locust? His majestic snorting strikes terror.
20 وَيُوثِبُهُ كَالْجَرَادِ؟ إِنَّ نَفْخَ نَخِيرِهِ هَائِلٌ.
21 He paws in the valley, and rejoices in his strength; He gallops into the clash of arms.
21 يَبْحَثُ فِي الْوَادِي وَيَمْرَحُ نَشَاطًا. وَيَقْتَحِمُ لِلِقَاءِ السِّلَاحِ.
22 He mocks at fear, and is not frightened; Nor does he turn back from the sword.
22 يَضْحَكُ عَلَى الْخَوْفِ وَلَا يَرْهَبُ، وَلَا يَنْهَزِمُ مِنَ السَّيْفِ.
23 The quiver rattles against him, The glittering spear and javelin.
23 تُصَلْصِلُ عَلَيْهِ السِّهَامُ وَسِنَانُ الرُّمْحِ وَالْمِزْرَاقِ.
24 He devours the distance with fierceness and rage; Nor does he come to a halt because the trumpet has sounded.
24 فِي هَيَجَانِهِ وَرِجْزِهِ يَلْتَهِمُ الْأَرْضَ، وَلَا يُصَدِّقُ أَنْ يَهْتِفَ الْبُوقُ.
25 At the blast of the trumpet he says, ‘Aha!’ He smells the battle from afar, The thunder of captains and shouting.
25 إِذَا نُفِخَ فِي الْبُوقِ يَقُولُ: هَا! وَيَسْتَرْوِحُ الْقِتَالَ عَنْ بُعْدٍ وَصِيَاحَ الْقُوَّادِ وَالْهُتَافَ.
26 “Does the hawk fly by your wisdom, And spread its wings toward the south?
26 أَبِحِكْمَتِكَ يَسْتَقِلُّ الْبَازِي فِي الْجَوِّ وَيَبْسُطُ جَنَاحَيْهِ نَحْوَ الْجَنُوبِ؟
27 Does the eagle mount up at your command, And make its nest on high?
27 أَمْ بِأَمْرِكَ يُحَلِّقُ النَّسْرُ وَيَجْعَلُ وَكْرَهُ فِي الْعَلَاءِ؟
28 On the rock it dwells and resides, On the crag of the rock and the stronghold.
28 مَسْكَنُهُ الصَّخْرُ وَفِيهِ مَبِيتُهُ وَعَلَى أَنْفِ الصَّخْرِ مَعْقِلُهُ.
29 From there it spies out the prey; Its eyes observe from afar.
29 مِنْ هُنَاكَ يَبْحَثُ عَنْ قُوتِهِ. وَعَيْنَاهُ تَنْظُرَانِ إِلَى بَعِيدٍ.
30 Its young ones suck up blood; And where the slain are, there it is.”
30 فِرَاخُهُ تَعُبُّ الدِّمَاءَ، وَحَيْثُمَا كَانَتِ الْقَتْلَى فَهُنَاكَ يَكُونُ.
Glory be to the Holy Trinity, our God, forever and unto the ages of all ages. Amen.
Ⲟⲩⲱ̀ⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ϯⲧ̀ⲣⲓⲁⲥ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ Ⲡⲉⲛⲛⲟⲩϯ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛⲉⲙ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲛⲓⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲧⲏⲣⲟⲩ: ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ.
مجداً للثالوث القدوس إلهنا الى أبد الآبدين كلها آمين.