Stand in the fear of God and listen to the Holy Gospel. A reading from the Gospel according to our teacher Saint Luke the Evangelist, and the pure disciple. May his blessings be with us all.
قِفُوا بِخَوْفِ اللهِ، وَأَنْصِتُوا لِسَمَاعِ الإِنْجِيلِ الْمُقَدَّسِ. فَصْلٌ مِنْ بِشَارَةِ الإِنْجِيلِ لِمُعَلِّمِنَا مَارْ لوقا الْبَشِيرِ، التِّلْمِيذِ الطَّاهِرِ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
From the Psalms of our teacher David the prophet. May his blessings be with us all.
مِنْ مَزَامِيرِ تَرَاتِيلِ مُعَلِّمِنَا دَاوُدَ النَّبِيِّ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
Matins Psalm
المزمور
	Psalms 37:18
(مزامير 37: 18)
For I will declare my iniquity; I will be in anguish over my sin. But my enemies are vigorous, and they are strong.
Ϫⲉ ⲧⲁⲁ̀ⲛⲟⲙⲓⲁ̀ ⲁ̀ⲛⲟⲕ ϯⲛⲁⲟⲩⲟⲛϩⲥ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ: ⲟⲩⲟϩ ϯⲛⲁϥⲓⲣⲱⲟⲩϣ ⲉ̀ϩ̀ⲣⲏⲓ ⲉ̀ϫⲉⲛ ⲡⲁⲛⲟⲃⲓ: ⲛⲁϫⲁϫⲓ ⲇⲉ ⲥⲉⲟⲛϧ: ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲥⲉⲁ̀ⲙⲁϩⲓ ⲉ̀ϩⲟⲧⲉⲣⲟⲓ: ⲁ︦ⲗ︦.
لِأَنِّي أُخْبِرُ بِإِثْمِي، وَأَهْتَمُّ مِنْ أَجْلِ خَطِيَّتِي. أَعْدَائِي أَحْيَاءٌ، وَهُمْ أَشَدُّ مِنِّي.
People:
Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
الليلويا.
	Psalm Trailer for the Pope or a Bishop
(Ⲙⲁⲣⲟⲩϭⲁⲥϥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲧ̀ⲉⲕⲕ̀ⲗⲏⲥⲓⲁ̀...)
People:
Amen Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲙⲏⲛ Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
امين الليلويا.
Then the introduction to the Gospel is read.
ثم تقال مقدمة الأنجيل وهي:
Reader:
Blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord. Our Lord, God, Savior and King of us all, Jesus Christ, Son of the living God to whom is glory forever. Amen.
القارﺉُ:
مباركٌ الآتي باسمِ الربِّ إلهِ القواتِ، ربُّنا وإلهُنا ومخلصُنا وملكُنا كلِّنا، يسوعُ المسيحُ، ابنُ اللهِ الحيِّ، الذي لهُ المجدُ إلى الأبدِ. آمين.
Matins Gospel
الإنجيل
	Luke 17:1-10
(لوقا 17: 1-10)
1 Then He said to the disciples, “It is impossible that no offenses should come, but woe to him through whom they do come!
Ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ⲇⲉ ⲛ̀ⲛⲉϥⲙⲁⲑⲏⲧⲏⲥ ϫⲉ ϩⲱϯ ⲛ̀ⲧⲟⲩⲓ̀ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲛⲓⲥ̀ⲕⲁⲛⲇⲁⲗⲟⲛ ⲡ̀ⲗⲏⲛ ⲟⲩⲟⲓ ⲙ̀ⲫⲏⲉⲧⲉ ⲡⲓⲥ̀ⲕⲁⲛⲇⲁⲗⲟⲛ ⲛⲏⲟⲩ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ϩⲓⲧⲟⲧϥ.
1 ثُمَّ قَالَ لِتَلَامِيذِهِ: " لَا بُدَّ أَنْ تَأْتِيَ الْعَثَرَاتُ، وَلَكِنْ وَيْلٌ لِمَنْ تَأْتِي الْعَثْرَةُ مِنْ قِبَلِهِ!
2 It would be better for him if a millstone were hung around his neck, and he were thrown into the sea, than that he should offend one of these little ones.
Ⲛⲁⲛⲉⲥ ⲛⲁϥ ⲛ̀ⲧⲟⲩⲉϣ ⲟⲩⲱⲛⲓ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲩⲗⲟⲛ ⲉ̀ϧⲏⲧϥ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲟⲩϩⲓⲧϥ ⲉ̀ϧ̀ⲣⲏⲓ ⲉ̀ⲫ̀ⲓⲟⲙ ⲉ̀ϩⲟⲧⲉ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉϥⲉⲣⲥ̀ⲕⲁⲛⲇⲁⲗⲓⲍⲉⲥⲑⲉ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩⲁⲓ ⲛ̀ⲛⲁⲓⲕⲟⲩϫⲓ.
2 خَيْرٌ لَهُ أَنْ يُعَلَّقَ بِهِ حَجَرُ رَحىً ويُلْقى فِي الْبَحْرِ، مِنْ أَنْ يُعْثِرَ أَحَدَ هَؤُلَاءِ الصِّغَارِ.
3 Take heed to yourselves. If your brother sins against you, rebuke him; and if he repents, forgive him.
Ⲙⲁϩⲑⲏⲧⲉⲛ ⲉ̀ⲣⲱⲧⲉⲛ ⲁⲣⲉϣⲁⲛ ⲉⲕⲥⲟⲛ ⲉⲣⲛⲟⲃⲓ ⲁⲣⲓⲉ̀ⲡⲓⲧⲓⲙⲁⲛ ⲛⲁϥ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉϣⲱⲡ ⲁϥϣⲁⲛⲉⲣⲙⲉⲧⲁⲛⲟⲓⲛ ⲭⲱ ⲛⲁϥ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ.
3 اِحْتَرِزُوا لِأَنْفُسِكُمْ. إِنْ أَخْطَأَ إِلَيْكَ أَخُوكَ فَوَبِّخْهُ، وَإِنْ تَابَ فَاغْفِرْ لَهُ.
4 And if he sins against you seven times in a day, and seven times in a day returns to you, saying, ‘I repent,’ you shall forgive him.”
Ⲉϣⲱⲡ ⲇⲉ ⲁϥϣⲁⲛⲉⲣⲛⲟⲃⲓ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟⲕ ⲛ̀ⲍ︦ ⲛ̀ⲥⲟⲡ ⲉⲛ ⲉ̀ϩⲟⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉϥⲕⲟⲧϥ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟⲕ ⲛ̀ⲍ︦ ⲛ̀ⲥⲟⲡ ⲉϥϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ϫⲉ ϯⲉⲣⲙⲉⲧⲁⲛⲟⲓⲛ ⲭⲱ ⲛⲁϥ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ.
4 وَإِنْ أَخْطَأَ إِلَيْكَ سَبْعَ مَرَّاتٍ فِي الْيَوْمِ وَرَجَعَ إِلَيْكَ سَبْعَ مَرَّاتٍ قَائِلًا: أَنَا تَائِبٌ، فَاغْفِرْ لَهُ ".
5 And the apostles said to the Lord, “Increase our faith.”
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲡⲉϫⲉ ⲛⲓⲁⲡⲟⲥⲧⲟⲗⲟⲥ ⲙ̀Ⲡⲟ︦ⲥ︦ ϫⲉ ⲟⲩⲁϩⲛⲁϩϯ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟⲛ.
5 فَقَالَ الرُّسُلُ لِلرَّبِّ: " زِدْ إِيمَانَنَا‍! ".
6 So the Lord said, “If you have faith as a mustard seed, you can say to this mulberry tree, ‘Be pulled up by the roots and be planted in the sea,’ and it would obey you.
Ⲡⲉϫⲉ Ⲡⲟ︦ⲥ︦ ⲇⲉ ϫⲉ ⲉⲛⲉ ⲟⲩⲟⲛⲧⲉⲧⲉⲛ ⲛⲁϩϯ ⲙ̀ⲙⲁⲩ ⲙ̀ⲫ̀ⲣⲏϯ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩⲛⲁⲫⲣⲓ ⲛ̀ϣⲉⲗⲧⲁⲙ ⲛⲁⲣⲉⲧⲉⲛⲛⲁϫⲟⲥ ⲛ̀ϯⲛⲟⲩϩⲓ ϫⲉ ϥⲱϫⲓ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲣⲱⲧ ϧⲉⲛ ⲫ̀ⲓⲟⲙ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛⲁⲥⲛⲁⲥⲱⲧⲉⲙ ⲛ̀ⲥⲁ ⲑⲏⲛⲟⲩ ⲡⲉ.
6 فَقَالَ الرَّبُّ: " لَوْ كَانَ لَكُمْ إِيمَانٌ مِثْلُ حَبَّةِ خَرْدَلٍ، لَكُنْتُمْ تَقُولُونَ لِهَذِهِ الْجُمَّيْزَةِ: انْقَلِعِي وَانْغَرِسِي فِي الْبَحْرِ فَكَانَتْ تُطِيعُكُمْ.
7 And which of you, having a servant plowing or tending sheep, will say to him when he has come in from the field, ‘Come at once and sit down to eat’?
Ⲛⲓⲙ ⲇⲉ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ϧⲉⲛ ⲑⲏⲛⲟⲩ ⲉⲧⲉ ⲟⲩⲟⲛⲧⲉϥ ⲟⲩⲃⲱⲕ ⲙ̀ⲙⲁⲩ ⲉϥⲥ̀ⲭⲁⲓ ⲓⲉ ⲉϥⲙⲟⲛⲓ ⲫⲏⲉⲧⲉ ⲁϥϣⲁⲛⲓ̀ ⲉ̀ϧⲟⲩⲛ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ϧⲉⲛ ⲧ̀ⲕⲟⲓ ⲙⲏ ϥ̀ⲛⲁϫⲟⲥ ⲛⲁϥ ⲥⲁⲧⲟⲧϥ ϫⲉ ⲁⲙⲟⲩ ⲉ̀ⲡ̀ϣⲱⲓ ⲣⲱⲧⲉⲃ.
7 وَمَنْ مِنْكُمْ لَهُ عَبْدٌ يَحْرُثُ أَوْ يَرْعَى، إِذَا دَخَلَ مِنَ الْحَقْلِ هَلْ يَقُولُ لَهُ: تَقَدَّمْ سَرِيعًا وَاتَّكِئْ.
8 But will he not rather say to him, ‘Prepare something for my supper, and gird yourself and serve me till I have eaten and drunk, and afterward you will eat and drink’?
Ⲙⲏ ϥ̀ⲛⲁϫⲟⲥ ⲛⲁϥ ⲁⲛ ϫⲉ ⲥⲟⲃϯ ⲙ̀ⲫⲏ ⲉ̀ϯⲛⲁⲟⲩⲟⲙϥ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲙⲟⲣⲕ ϣⲉⲙϣⲓ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲓ ϣⲁϯⲟⲩⲱⲙ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲁⲥⲱ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲙⲉⲛⲉⲛⲥⲁ ⲁⲓ ϩⲱⲕ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉⲕⲟⲩⲱⲙ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉⲕⲥⲱ.
8 أَلَا يَقُولُ لَهُ: أَعْدِدْ لِي مَا آكُلُهُ وَتَمَنْطَقْ وَاخْدِمْنِي حَتَّى آكُلَ وَأَشْرَبَ، وَبَعْدَ ذلِكَ تَأْكُلُ وَتَشْرَبُ أَنْتَ؟
9 Does he thank that servant because he did the things that were commanded him? I think not.
Ⲙⲏ ⲟⲩⲟⲛ ϩ̀ⲙⲟⲧ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟϥ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲡⲓⲃⲱⲕ ϫⲉ ⲁϥⲓ̀ⲣⲓ ⲛ̀ⲛⲏⲉⲧⲁϥⲟⲩⲁϩⲥⲁϩⲛⲓ ⲙ̀ⲙⲱⲟⲩ ⲛⲁϥ.
9 فَهَلْ لِذَلِكَ الْعَبْدِ فَضْلٌ لِأَنَّهُ فَعَلَ مَا أُمِرَ بِهِ؟ لاَ أَظُنُّ.
10 So likewise you, when you have done all those things which you are commanded, say, ‘We are unprofitable servants. We have done what was our duty to do.’”
Ⲁⲓⲣⲏϯ ⲛ̀ⲑⲱⲧⲉⲛ ϩⲱⲧⲉⲛ ⲁⲣⲉⲧⲉⲛϣⲁⲛⲓ̀ⲣⲓ ⲛ̀ϩⲱⲃ ⲛⲓⲃⲉⲛ ⲉⲧⲁⲩⲟⲩⲁϩⲥⲁϩⲛⲓ ⲙ̀ⲙⲱⲟⲩ ⲛⲱⲧⲉⲛ ⲁ̀ϫⲟⲥ ϫⲉ ⲁ̀ⲛⲟⲛ ϩⲁⲛⲃⲱⲕ ⲛ̀ⲁⲧϣⲁⲩ ⲡⲉⲧⲉⲣⲟⲛ ⲉⲁⲓϥ ⲁⲛⲁⲓϥ.
10 كَذلِكَ أَنْتُمْ أَيْضًا، مَتَى فَعَلْتُمْ كُلَّ مَا أُمِرْتُمْ بِهِ فَقُولُوا: إِنَّنَا عَبِيدٌ بَطَّالُونَ، وَمَا عَلَيْنَا أَنْ نَعْمَلَهُ فَقَدْ صَنَعْنَاهُ ".