Stand in the fear of God and listen to the Holy Gospel. A reading from the Gospel according to our teacher Saint Luke the Evangelist, and the pure disciple. May his blessings be with us all.
قِفُوا بِخَوْفِ اللهِ، وَأَنْصِتُوا لِسَمَاعِ الإِنْجِيلِ الْمُقَدَّسِ. فَصْلٌ مِنْ بِشَارَةِ الإِنْجِيلِ لِمُعَلِّمِنَا مَارْ لوقا الْبَشِيرِ، التِّلْمِيذِ الطَّاهِرِ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
From the Psalms of our teacher David the prophet. May his blessings be with us all.
مِنْ مَزَامِيرِ تَرَاتِيلِ مُعَلِّمِنَا دَاوُدَ النَّبِيِّ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
Matins Psalm
المزمور
	Psalms 26:5
(مزامير 26: 5)
One thing I have desired of the Lord, That will I seek: That I may dwell in the house of the Lord All the days of my life.
Ⲟⲩⲁⲓ ⲡⲉ ⲉ̀ⲧⲁⲉ̀ⲣⲉⲧⲓⲛ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟϥ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉⲛ Ⲡⲟ︦ⲥ︦: Ⲫⲁⲓ ⲟⲛ ⲡⲉ ϯⲛⲁⲕⲱϯ ⲛ̀ⲥⲱϥ: ⲉ̀ⲡϫ̀ⲓⲛⲧⲁϣⲱⲡⲓ ϧⲉⲛ ⲡ̀ⲏⲓ ⲙ̀Ⲡⲟ︦ⲥ︦: ⲛ̀ⲛⲓⲉ̀ϩⲟⲟⲩ ⲧⲏⲣⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲡⲁⲱⲛϧ: ⲁ︦ⲗ︦.
وَاحِدَةً سَأَلْتُ مِنَ الرَّبِّ، وَإِيَّاهَا أَلْتَمِسُ، أَنْ أَسْكُنَ فِي بَيْتِ الرَّبِّ، جَمِيعَ أَيَّامِ حَيَاتِي.
People:
Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
الليلويا.
	Psalm Trailer for the Pope or a Bishop
(Ⲙⲁⲣⲟⲩϭⲁⲥϥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲧ̀ⲉⲕⲕ̀ⲗⲏⲥⲓⲁ̀...)
People:
Amen Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲙⲏⲛ Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
امين الليلويا.
Then the introduction to the Gospel is read.
ثم تقال مقدمة الأنجيل وهي:
Reader:
Blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord. Our Lord, God, Savior and King of us all, Jesus Christ, Son of the living God to whom is glory forever. Amen.
القارﺉُ:
مباركٌ الآتي باسمِ الربِّ إلهِ القواتِ، ربُّنا وإلهُنا ومخلصُنا وملكُنا كلِّنا، يسوعُ المسيحُ، ابنُ اللهِ الحيِّ، الذي لهُ المجدُ إلى الأبدِ. آمين.
Matins Gospel
الإنجيل
	Luke 13:18-22
(لوقا 13: 18-22)
18 Then He said, “What is the kingdom of God like? And to what shall I compare it?
Ⲛⲁϥϫⲱ ⲩⲛ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ⲡⲉ ϫⲉ ⲁⲣⲉ ϯⲙⲉⲧⲟⲩⲣⲟ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲫϯ ⲁⲥⲟ̀ⲛⲓ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁⲓⲛⲁⲧⲉⲛⲑⲱⲛⲥ ⲉ̀ⲟⲩ.
18 وَكَانَ يَقُولُ: " مَاذَا يُشْبِهُ مَلَكُوتُ السَّمَاوَاتِ؟ وَبِمَاذَا أُشَبِّهُهُ؟
19 It is like a mustard seed, which a man took and put in his garden; and it grew and became a large tree, and the birds of the air nested in its branches.”
Ⲥ̀ⲟ̀ⲛⲓ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩⲛⲁⲫⲣⲓ ⲛ̀ϣⲉⲗⲧⲁⲙ ⲑⲏ ⲉⲧⲁ ⲟⲩⲣⲱⲙⲓ ⲓⲧⲥ ⲁϥⲥⲁⲧⲥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲡⲉϥϭⲱⲙ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁⲥⲁⲓⲁⲓ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁⲥϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲉ̀ⲟⲩϣ̀ϣⲏⲛ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛⲓϩⲁⲗⲁϯ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲧ̀ⲫⲉ ⲁⲩⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉ̀ϫⲉⲛ ⲛⲉⲥϫⲁⲗ.
19 إِنَّهُ يُشْبِهُ حَبَّةَ خَرْدَلٍ أَخَذَهَا إِنْسَانٌ وَأَلْقَاهَا فِي بُسْتَانِهِ، فَنَمَتْ وَصَارَتْ شَجَرَةً عَظِيمَةً، وَاسْتَظَلَّتْ طُيُورُ السَّمَاءِ فِي أَغْصَانِهَا ".
20 And again He said, “To what shall I liken the kingdom of God?
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁⲗⲓⲛ ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ϫⲉ ⲁⲓⲛⲁⲧⲉⲛⲑⲱⲛ ϯⲙⲉⲧⲟⲩⲣⲟ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲫϯ ⲉ̀ⲟⲩ.
20 وَقَالَ أَيْضًا: " بِمَاذَا أُشَبِّهُ مَلَكُوتَ اللَّهِ؟
21 It is like leaven, which a woman took and hid in three measures of meal till it was all leavened.”
Ⲥ̀ⲟ̀ⲛⲓ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩϣⲉⲙⲏⲣ ⲫⲏⲉⲧⲁ ⲟⲩⲥ̀ϩⲓⲙⲓ ϭⲓⲧϥ ⲁⲥⲭⲟⲡϥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲅ︦ ⲛ̀ϣⲓ ⲛⲛⲱⲓⲧ ϣⲁⲧⲉϥ ϭⲓϣⲉⲙⲏⲣ ⲧⲏⲣϥ.
21 إِنَّهُ يُشْبِهُ خَمِيرَةً أَخَذَتْهَا امْرَأَةٌ وَخَبَّأَتْهَا فِي ثَلَاثَةِ أَكْيَالِ دَقِيقٍ حَتَّى اخْتَمَرَ الْجَمِيعُ ".
22 And He went through the cities and villages, teaching, and journeying toward Jerusalem.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛⲁϥⲙⲟϣⲓ ⲡⲉ ⲕⲁⲧⲁ ⲃⲁⲕⲓ ⲛⲉⲙ ϯⲙⲓ ⲉϥϯⲥ̀ⲃⲱ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉϥⲓ̀ⲣⲓ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉϥϫⲓⲛⲙⲟϣⲓ ⲉ̀ⲓⲗ︦ⲏ︦ⲙ︦.
22 وَكَانَ يَجْتَازُ فِي الْمُدُنِ وَالْقُرَى يُعَلِّمُ وَهُوَ سَائِرٌ إِلَى أُورُشَلِيمِ.