Prophecies
النبوآت
	Exodus 3:6-14
(الخروج 3: 6-14)
A reading from the Book of Exodus of Moses the prophet. May his holy blessings be with us. Amen.
Ⲉⲃⲟⲗϧⲉⲛ Ⲡⲓⲇⲟⲝⲟⲇⲟⲥ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ Ⲙⲱⲩ̀ⲥⲏⲥ ⲡⲓⲡ̀ⲣⲟⲫⲏⲧⲏⲥ: ⲉ̀ⲣⲉⲡⲉϥⲥ̀ⲙⲟⲩ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ ϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲛⲉⲙⲁⲛ ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ ⲉϥϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ:
من سفر الخروج لموسى النبي بركته المقدسة تكون معنا. آمين.
6 Moreover He said to Moses, “I am the God of your father—the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob.” And Moses hid his face, for he was afraid to look upon God.
6 وَقَالَ اللَّهُ لِمُوسَى: أَنَا إِلَهُ آبَائِكَ، إِلهُ إِبْرَاهِيمَ وَإِلَهُ إِسْحَاقَ وَإِلَهُ يَعْقُوبَ، فَحَوَّلَ مُوسَى وَجْهَهُ إِذْ خَافَ أَنْ يَنْظُرَ إِلَى اللَّهِ.
7 And the Lord said: “I have surely seen the oppression of My people who are in Egypt, and have heard their cry because of their taskmasters, for I know their sorrows.
7 فَقَالَ الرَّبُّ لِمُوسَى: إِنِّـي قَدْ نَظَرْتُ إِلَى مَذَلَّةِ شَعْبِيَ الَّذِي فِي مِصْرَ وَسَمِعْتُ صُرَاخَهُمْ مِنْ قِبَلِ مُسَخِّرِيِهِمْ، وَعَلِمْتُ بِتَنَهُّدِهِمْ،
8 So I have come down to deliver them out of the hand of the Egyptians, and to bring them up from that land to a good and large land, to a land flowing with milk and honey, to the place of the Canaanites and the Hittites and the Amorites and the Perizzites and the Hivites and the Jebusites.
8 فَنَزَلْتُ لِأُنْقِذَهُمْ مِنْ أَيَدِي الْمِصْرِيِّينَ، وَأُصْعِدَهُمْ مِنْ تِلْكَ الْأَرْضِ إِلَى أَرْضٍ جَيِّدَةٍ وَوَاسِعَةٍ، أَرْضٍ تَدُرُّ لَبَنًا وَعَسَلًا، إِلَى مَكَانِ الْكَنْعَانِيِّينَ وَالْحِثِّيِّينَ وَالْأَمُورِيِّينَ وَالْفِرِزِّيِّينَ وَالْحِوِّيِّينَ والجِرجَاشِيِّينَ وَالْيَبُوسِيِّينَ.
9 Now therefore, behold, the cry of the children of Israel has come to Me, and I have also seen the oppression with which the Egyptians oppress them.
9 وَالْآنَ هُوَذَا صُرَاخُ بَنِي إِسْرَائِيلَ قَدْ بَلَغَ إِلَيَّ، وَقَدْ رَأَيْتُ الضِّيقَةَ الَّتِي يُضَايِقُهُمْ بِهَا الْمِصْرِيُّونَ،
10 Come now, therefore, and I will send you to Pharaoh that you may bring My people, the children of Israel, out of Egypt.”
10 فَالْآنَ هَلُمَّ فَأَبْعَثُكَ إِلَى فِرْعَوْنَ مَلِكِ مِصْرَ وَأُخْرِجُ شَعْبِي بَنِـي إِسْرَائِيلَ مِنْ أَرْضِ مِصْرَ.
11 But Moses said to God, “Who am I that I should go to Pharaoh, and that I should bring the children of Israel out of Egypt?”
11 فَقَالَ مُوسَى ِللَّهِ: مَنْ أَنَا حَتَّى أَمْضِيَ إِلَى فِرْعَوْنَ مَلَكِ مِصْرَ، وَأُخْرِجَ بَنِي إِسْرَائِيلَ مِنْ أَرْضِ مِصْرَ؟
12 So He said, “I will certainly be with you. And this shall be a sign to you that I have sent you: When you have brought the people out of Egypt, you shall serve God on this mountain.”
12 فَقَالَ: إِنِّي أَكُونُ مَعَكَ، وَهَذِهِ عَلَامَةٌ لَكَ عَلَى أَنِّي أَنَا بَعَثْتُكَ، حِينَمَا تُخْرِجُ شَعْبِي مِنْ مِصْرَ، تَعْبُدُونَ اللَّهَ عَلَى هَذَا الْجَبَلِ.
13 Then Moses said to God, “Indeed, when I come to the children of Israel and say to them, ‘The God of your fathers has sent me to you,’ and they say to me, ‘What is His name?’ what shall I say to them?”
13 فَقَالَ مُوسَى لِلَّهِ: هَا أَنَا سَائِرٌ إِلَى بَنِي إِسْرَائِيلَ وَأَقُولُ لَهُمْ: إِلَهُ آبَائِكُمْ بَعَثَنِي إِلَيْكُمْ. فَإِنْ قَالُوا لِي: مَا اسْمُهُ؟ فَمَاذَا أَقُولُ لَهُمْ؟
14 And God said to Moses, “I AM WHO I AM.” And He said, “Thus you shall say to the children of Israel, ‘I AM has sent me to you.’”
14 فَقَالَ اللَّهُ لِمُوسَى: أَنَا هُوَ الْكَائِنُ. وَقَالَ كَذَا قُلْ لِبَنِـي إِسْرَائِيلَ: الْكَائِنُ أَرْسَلَنِـي إِلَيْكُمْ.
Glory be to the Holy Trinity, our God, forever and unto the ages of all ages. Amen.
Ⲟⲩⲱ̀ⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ϯⲧ̀ⲣⲓⲁⲥ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ Ⲡⲉⲛⲛⲟⲩϯ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛⲉⲙ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲛⲓⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲧⲏⲣⲟⲩ: ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ.
مجداً للثالوث القدوس إلهنا الى أبد الآبدين كلها آمين.
	Isaiah 4:2-5:7
(اشعياء 4: 2-5: 7)
A reading from Isaiah, the prophet. May his holy blessings be with us. Amen.
Ⲉⲃⲟⲗϧⲉⲛ Ⲏⲥⲁⲏ̀ⲁⲥ ⲡⲓⲡ̀ⲣⲟⲫⲏⲧⲏⲥ: ⲉ̀ⲣⲉⲡⲉϥⲥ̀ⲙⲟⲩ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ ϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲛⲉⲙⲁⲛ ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ ⲉϥϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ:
من اشعياء النبي بركته المقدسة تكون معنا. آمين.
2 In that day the Branch of the Lord shall be beautiful and glorious; And the fruit of the earth shall be excellent and appealing For those of Israel who have escaped.
2 فِي ذَلِكَ الْيَوْمِ يُنِيرُ اللَّهُ بِالْمَشُورَةِ وَالْمَجْدِ عَلَى الْأَرْضِ، لِيَرْتَفِعَ وَيَتَمَجَّدَ كُلُّ مَنْ يَبْقَى مِنْ إسْرَائِيلَ.
3 And it shall come to pass that he who is left in Zion and remains in Jerusalem will be called holy—everyone who is recorded among the living in Jerusalem.
3 وَيَكُونُ كُلُّ مَنْ يَبْقَى فِي صِهْيَوْنَ وَبَقِيَّةُ أُورُشَلِيمَ، يُدْعَوْنَ أَطْهَارًا، وَيُكْتَبُ لِلْحَيَاةِ كُلُّ مَنْ فِي أُورُشَلِيمَ.
4 When the Lord has washed away the filth of the daughters of Zion, and purged the blood of Jerusalem from her midst, by the spirit of judgment and by the spirit of burning,
4 لِأَنَّ الرَّبَّ يَغْسِلُ قَذَرَ بَنِي إِسْرَائِيلَ وَأَوْلَادِ صِهْيَوْنَ. وَيَمْحُو الدِّمَاءَ مِنْ وَسَطِهَا بِرُوحِ الْقَضَاءِ وَرُوْحِ الْإِحْرَاقِ،
5 then the Lord will create above every dwelling place of Mount Zion, and above her assemblies, a cloud and smoke by day and the shining of a flaming fire by night. For over all the glory there will be a covering.
5 وَيَخْلُقُ الرَّبُّ عَلَى كُلِّ مَكَانٍ فِي جَبَلِ صِهْيَوْنَ وَعَلَى مَحَافِلِهَا غَمَامًا فِي النَّهَارِ، وَدُخَانًا وَلَمَعَانَ نَارٍ مُلْتَهِبَةٍ فِي اللَّيْلِ، فَيَكُونُ عَلَى كُلِّ مَجْدٍ غِطَاءٌ.
6 And there will be a tabernacle for shade in the daytime from the heat, for a place of refuge, and for a shelter from storm and rain.
6 وَيَكُونُ خِبَاءٌ ظِلًّا فِي النَّهَارِ مِنَ الْحَرِّ، وَمُعْتَصَمًا وَسِتْرًا مِنَ السَّيْلِ وَالْمَطَرِ.
1 Now let me sing to my Well-beloved A song of my Beloved regarding His vineyard: My Well-beloved has a vineyard On a very fruitful hill.
1 أُمَجِّدُ الَّذِي أُحِبُّهُ بِنَشِيدِ الْحَبِيبِ لِهَذَا الْكَرْمِ: كَانَ لِلْحَبِيبِ كَرْمٌ فِي رَابِيَةٍ، فِي مَوْضِعٍ خَصِبٍ،
2 He dug it up and cleared out its stones, And planted it with the choicest vine. He built a tower in its midst, And also made a winepress in it; So He expected it to bring forth good grapes, But it brought forth wild grapes.
2 فَأَحَطْتُ بِهِ سِيَاجًا وَرَفَعْتُهُ عَلَى الْقَصَبِ وَغَرَسْتُ كَرْمًا فِي سَوْرَقٍ، وَبَنَيْتُ فِيهِ بُرْجًا فِي وَسَطِهِ، وَحَفَرْتُ فِيهِ مَعْصَرَةً، وَانْتَظَرْتُ أَنْ يُخْرِجَ عِنَبًا فَأَخْرَجَ عِنَبًا رَدِيئًا.
3 “And now, O inhabitants of Jerusalem and men of Judah, Judge, please, between Me and My vineyard.
3 وَالْآنَ يَا رِجَالَ يَهُوذَا وَسُكَّانَ أُورُشَلِيمَ، اُحْكُمُوا بَيْنِي وبَيْنَ كَرْمِي.
4 What more could have been done to My vineyard That I have not done in it? Why then, when I expected it to bring forth good grapes, Did it bring forth wild grapes?
4 أَيُّ شَيءٍ يُصْنَعُ لِكَرْمِي وَأَنَا لَمْ أَصْنَعْهُ بِهِ؟ لِأَنِّي رَجَوْتُ أَنْ يُخْرِجَ عِنَبًا فَأَخْرَجَ عِنَبًا رَدِيئًا.
5 And now, please let Me tell you what I will do to My vineyard: I will take away its hedge, and it shall be burned; And break down its wall, and it shall be trampled down.
5 فَالْآنَ أُعْلِمُكُمْ مَاذَا أَفْعَلُ بِكَرْمِي: أَقْلَعُ سِيَاجَهُ فَيَصِيرُ لِلْنَهْبِ. وأَهْدِمُ جِدَارَهُ فَيَكُونُ مَدُوسًا.
6 I will lay it waste; It shall not be pruned or dug, But there shall come up briers and thorns. I will also command the clouds That they rain no rain on it.”
6 وَأُهْمِلُ هَذَا الْكَرْمَ لَا يُقْضَبْ وَلَا يُفَلَّحُ، ويَنْبُتُ فِيهِ الشَّوْكُ مِثْلَ القَفْرِ. وَأُوصِي السَّحَابَ أَنْ لَا يُمْطِرَ عَلَيْهِ مَطَرًا؛
7 For the vineyard of the Lord of hosts is the house of Israel, And the men of Judah are His pleasant plant.
7 لِأَنَّ كَرْمَ رَبِّ الصَّباؤوتِ هُوَ بَيْتُ إِسْرَائِيلَ، وَرِجَالُ يَهُوذَا الْغَرْسُ الْجَدِيدُ الْمَحْبُوبُ.
Glory be to the Holy Trinity, our God, forever and unto the ages of all ages. Amen.
Ⲟⲩⲱ̀ⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ϯⲧ̀ⲣⲓⲁⲥ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ Ⲡⲉⲛⲛⲟⲩϯ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛⲉⲙ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲛⲓⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲧⲏⲣⲟⲩ: ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ.
مجداً للثالوث القدوس إلهنا الى أبد الآبدين كلها آمين.