Stand in the fear of God and listen to the Holy Gospel. A reading from the Gospel according to our teacher Saint Mark the Evangelist, and the pure disciple. May his blessings be with us all.
قِفُوا بِخَوْفِ اللهِ، وَأَنْصِتُوا لِسَمَاعِ الإِنْجِيلِ الْمُقَدَّسِ. فَصْلٌ مِنْ بِشَارَةِ الإِنْجِيلِ لِمُعَلِّمِنَا مَارْ مرقس الْبَشِيرِ، التِّلْمِيذِ الطَّاهِرِ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
From the Psalms of our teacher David the prophet. May his blessings be with us all.
مِنْ مَزَامِيرِ تَرَاتِيلِ مُعَلِّمِنَا دَاوُدَ النَّبِيِّ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
Matins Psalm
المزمور
	Psalms 11:9
(مزامير 11: 9)
You shall keep us, O Lord, You shall preserve us from this generation forever.
̀Ⲛⲑⲟⲕ ⲇⲉ Ⲡⲟ︦ⲥ︦ ⲉⲕⲉ̀ⲧⲟⲩϫⲟⲛ: ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉⲕⲉ̀ⲁ̀ⲣⲉϩ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟⲛ: ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗϩⲓⲧⲟⲧϥ: ⲙ̀ⲡⲓⲁⲓϫⲱⲟⲩ ⲛⲉⲙ ϣⲁⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ: ⲁ︦ⲗ︦.
وَأَنْتَ يَا رَبُّ تُنَجِّينَا، وَتَحْفَظُنَا، مِنْ هَذَا الْجِيلِ، وَإِلَى الدَّهْرِ.
People:
Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
الليلويا.
	Psalm Trailer for the Pope or a Bishop
(Ⲙⲁⲣⲟⲩϭⲁⲥϥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲧ̀ⲉⲕⲕ̀ⲗⲏⲥⲓⲁ̀...)
People:
Amen Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲙⲏⲛ Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
امين الليلويا.
Then the introduction to the Gospel is read.
ثم تقال مقدمة الأنجيل وهي:
Reader:
Blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord. Our Lord, God, Savior and King of us all, Jesus Christ, Son of the living God to whom is glory forever. Amen.
القارﺉُ:
مباركٌ الآتي باسمِ الربِّ إلهِ القواتِ، ربُّنا وإلهُنا ومخلصُنا وملكُنا كلِّنا، يسوعُ المسيحُ، ابنُ اللهِ الحيِّ، الذي لهُ المجدُ إلى الأبدِ. آمين.
Matins Gospel
الإنجيل
	Mark 3:7-12
(مرقس 3: 7-12)
7 But Jesus withdrew with His disciples to the sea. And a great multitude from Galilee followed Him, and from Judea
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ Ⲓⲏ︦ⲥ︦ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲛⲉϥⲙⲁⲑⲏⲧⲏⲥ ⲁⲩⲉⲣⲁⲛⲁⲭⲱⲣⲓⲛ ⲉ̀ⲥ̀ⲕⲉⲛ ⲫ̀ⲓⲟⲙ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲟⲩⲙⲏϣ ⲉϥⲟϣ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗϧⲉⲛ ϯⲄⲁⲗⲓⲗⲉⲁ̀ ⲁϥⲉⲣⲁ̀ⲕⲟⲗⲟⲩⲑⲓⲛ ⲛⲉⲙ ϯⲒⲟⲩⲇⲉⲁ̀.
7 فَانْطَلَقَ يَسُوعُ مَعَ تَلَامِيذِهِ إِلَى عَبْرِ الْبَحْرِ، وَتَبِعَهُ جَمْعٌ كَثِيرٌ مِنَ الْجَلِيلِ وَمِنَ الْيَهُودِيَّةِ
8 and Jerusalem and Idumea and beyond the Jordan; and those from Tyre and Sidon, a great multitude, when they heard how many things He was doing, came to Him.
Ⲛⲉⲙ Ⲓⲗ︦ⲏ︦ⲙ︦ ⲛⲉⲙ ϯϨⲩⲇⲟⲩⲙⲉⲁ̀ ⲛⲉⲙ ϩⲓⲙⲏⲣ ⲙ̀ⲡⲓⲒⲟⲣⲇⲁⲛⲏⲥ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲕⲉⲙⲏϣ ⲉϥⲟϣ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗϧⲉⲛ ⲛⲁ Ⲧⲩⲣⲟⲥ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲧ̀Ⲥⲓⲇⲱⲛ ⲉⲩⲥⲱⲧⲉⲙ ⲉ̀ⲛⲏⲉ̀ⲛⲁϥⲓ̀ⲣⲓ ⲙ̀ⲙⲱⲟⲩ ⲁⲩⲓ̀ ϩⲁⲣⲟϥ.
8 وَمِنْ أُورُشَلِيمَ وَمِنْ أَدُومِيَّةَ وَمِنْ عَبْرِ الأُرْدُنِّ. وَجَمْعٌ كَثِيرٌ مِنْ صُورَ وَصَيْدَا، وَسَمِعُوا بِمَا صَنَعَ فَأَتَوْا إِلَيْهِ.
9 So He told His disciples that a small boat should be kept ready for Him because of the multitude, lest they should crush Him.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁϥϫⲟⲥ ⲛ̀ⲛⲉϥⲙⲁⲑⲏⲧⲏⲥ ϩⲓⲛⲁ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲟⲩϫⲟⲓ ⲙⲟⲩⲛ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟϥ ⲉⲑⲃⲉ ⲡⲓⲙⲏϣ ϩⲓⲛⲁ ⲛ̀ⲧⲟⲩϣ̀ⲧⲉⲙϩⲉϫϩⲱϫϥ.
9 فَقَالَ لِتَلَامِيذِهِ بِأَنْ تُلَازِمَهُ سَفِينَةٌ لِسَبَبِ الْجَمْعِ، كَيْ لَا يَزْحَمُوهُ،
10 For He healed many, so that as many as had afflictions pressed about Him to touch Him.
Ϩⲁⲛⲙⲏϣ ⲅⲁⲣ ⲛⲁϥⲉⲣⲫⲁϧⲣⲓ ⲉ̀ⲣⲱⲟⲩ ϩⲱⲥⲧⲉ ⲛ̀ⲧⲟⲩⲓ̀ ⲉ̀ϫⲱϥ ⲛ̀ⲧⲟⲩϭⲓⲛⲉⲙⲁϥ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲟⲩⲟⲛ ⲛⲓⲃⲉⲛ ⲉ̀ⲛⲁⲣⲉ ϩⲁⲛⲙⲁⲥⲧⲓⲅⲝ ⲛⲉⲙⲱⲟⲩ.
10 لِأَنَّهُ كَانَ قَدْ أَبْرَأَ كَثِيرِينَ، حَتَّى وَقَعَ عَلَيْهِ لِيَلْمِسَهُ كُلُّ مَنْ فِيهِ دَاءٌ.
11 And the unclean spirits, whenever they saw Him, fell down before Him and cried out, saying, “You are the Son of God.”
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛⲓⲡⲛ︦ⲁ︦ ⲛ̀ⲁ̀ⲕⲁⲑⲁⲣⲧⲟⲛ ⲉ̀ϣⲱⲡ ⲛ̀ⲧⲟⲩⲛⲁⲩ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟϥ ϣⲁⲩϩⲓⲧⲟⲩ ⲉ̀ϧ̀ⲣⲏⲓ ϧⲁⲣⲁⲧϥ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛⲁⲩⲱϣ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ⲉⲩϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ϫⲉ ⲛ̀ⲑⲟⲕ ⲡⲉ Ⲡ̀ϣⲏⲣⲓ ⲙ̀Ⲫϯ.
11 وَالأَرْوَاحُ النَّجِسَةُ حِينَمَا نَظَرَتْهُ خَرَّتْ قُدَّامَهُ وَصَرَخَتْ قَائِلَةً: " إِنَّكَ أَنْتَ هُوَ ابْنُ اللَّهِ! ".
12 But He sternly warned them that they should not make Him known.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁϥⲉⲣⲉ̀ⲡⲓⲧⲓⲙⲁⲛ ⲛⲱⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩⲙⲏϣ ϩⲓⲛⲁ ⲛ̀ⲥⲉϣ̀ⲧⲉⲙⲟⲩⲟⲛϩϥ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ.
12 وانْتَهَرَهُمْ كَثِيرًا كَيْ لَا يُظْهِرُوهُ.