Stand in the fear of God and listen to the Holy Gospel. A reading from the Gospel according to our teacher Saint Matthew the Evangelist, and the pure disciple. May his blessings be with us all.
قِفُوا بِخَوْفِ اللهِ، وَأَنْصِتُوا لِسَمَاعِ الإِنْجِيلِ الْمُقَدَّسِ. فَصْلٌ مِنْ بِشَارَةِ الإِنْجِيلِ لِمُعَلِّمِنَا مَارْ متى الْبَشِيرِ، التِّلْمِيذِ الطَّاهِرِ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
From the Psalms of our teacher David the prophet. May his blessings be with us all.
مِنْ مَزَامِيرِ تَرَاتِيلِ مُعَلِّمِنَا دَاوُدَ النَّبِيِّ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
Matins Psalm
المزمور
	Psalms 27:10
(مزامير 27: 10)
Save Your people, And bless Your inheritance; Shepherd them also, And bear them up forever.
Ⲛⲟϩⲉⲙ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉⲕⲗⲁⲟⲥ: ⲥ̀ⲙⲟⲩ ⲉ̀ⲧⲉⲕⲕ̀ⲗⲏⲣⲟⲛⲟⲙⲓⲁ̀: ⲁ̀ⲙⲟⲛⲓ ⲙ̀ⲙⲱⲟⲩ: ϭⲁⲥⲟⲩ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ: ⲁ︦ⲗ︦.
خَلِّصْ شَعْبَكَ، بَارِكْ مِيرَاثَكَ، اِرْعَهُمْ، وَارْفَعْهُمْ إِلَى الْأَبَدِ.
People:
Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
الليلويا.
	Psalm Trailer for the Pope or a Bishop
(Ⲙⲁⲣⲟⲩϭⲁⲥϥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲧ̀ⲉⲕⲕ̀ⲗⲏⲥⲓⲁ̀...)
People:
Amen Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲙⲏⲛ Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
امين الليلويا.
Then the introduction to the Gospel is read.
ثم تقال مقدمة الأنجيل وهي:
Reader:
Blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord. Our Lord, God, Savior and King of us all, Jesus Christ, Son of the living God to whom is glory forever. Amen.
القارﺉُ:
مباركٌ الآتي باسمِ الربِّ إلهِ القواتِ، ربُّنا وإلهُنا ومخلصُنا وملكُنا كلِّنا، يسوعُ المسيحُ، ابنُ اللهِ الحيِّ، الذي لهُ المجدُ إلى الأبدِ. آمين.
Matins Gospel
الإنجيل
	Matthew 11:20-30
(متى 11: 20-30)
20 Then He began to rebuke the cities in which most of His mighty works had been done, because they did not repent:
Ⲧⲟⲧⲉ ⲁϥⲉⲣϩⲏⲧⲥ ⲛ̀ϩⲓⲭⲟϩ ⲉ̀ϧⲟⲩⲛ ⲉ̀ⲛⲓⲃⲁⲕⲓ ⲛⲏⲉ̀ⲧⲁ ⲡ̀ϩⲟⲩⲟ̀ ⲛ̀ⲛⲉϥϫⲟⲙ ϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲛ̀ϧⲏⲧⲟⲩ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲙ̀ⲡⲟⲩⲉⲣⲙⲉⲧⲁⲛⲟⲓⲛ.
20 حِينَئِذٍ ابْتَدَأَ يُوَبِّــخُ الْمُدُنَ الَّتِي صُنِعَتْ فِيهَا أَكْثَرُ قُوَّاتِهِ لِأَنَّهُمْ لَمْ يَتُوبُوا:
21 “Woe to you, Chorazin! Woe to you, Bethsaida! For if the mighty works which were done in you had been done in Tyre and Sidon, they would have repented long ago in sackcloth and ashes.
Ⲟⲩⲟⲓ ⲛⲉ Ⲭⲟⲣⲁⲍⲓⲛ ⲟⲩⲟⲓ ⲛⲉ Ⲃⲏⲑⲥⲁⲓ̀ⲇⲁ ϫⲉ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉ ⲁ̀ ⲛⲁⲓϫⲟⲙ ϣⲱⲡⲓ ϧⲉⲛ Ⲧⲩⲣⲟⲥ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲧ̀Ⲥⲓⲇⲱⲛ ⲉ̀ⲧⲁⲩϣⲱⲡⲓ ϧⲉⲛ ⲑⲏⲛⲟⲩ ⲛⲉ ⲓⲥⲑ̀ⲛⲉⲓ ⲡⲉ ⲁⲩⲉⲣⲙⲉⲧⲁⲛⲟⲓⲛ ϧⲉⲛ ⲟⲩⲥⲟⲕ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲟⲩⲕⲉⲣⲙⲓ.
21 " وَيْلٌ لَكِ يَا كُورَزِينُ! وَيْلٌ لَكِ يَا بَيْتَ صَيْدَا! لِأَنَّهُ لَوْ صُنِعَتْ فِي صُورَ وصَيْدَا الْقُوَّاتُ الَّتِي صُنِعَتْ فِيكُمَا، لَتَابَتَا قَدِيمًا فِي الْمُسُوحِ وَالرَّمَادِ.
22 But I say to you, it will be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon in the day of judgment than for you.
Ⲡ̀ⲗⲏⲛ ϯϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ⲛⲱⲧⲉⲛ ϫⲉ Ⲧⲩⲣⲟⲥ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲧ̀Ⲥⲓⲇⲱⲛ ⲉⲩⲉ̀ϯⲁ̀ⲥⲟ ⲉ̀ⲣⲱⲟⲩ ϧⲉⲛ ⲡ̀ⲉ̀ϩⲟⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ϯⲕ̀ⲣⲓⲥⲓⲥ ⲉ̀ϩⲟⲧⲉⲣⲱⲧⲉⲛ.
22 لَكِنَّنِي أَقُولُ لَكُمْ: إِنَّ صُورَ وَصَيْدَا تَكُونُ لَهُمَا حَالَةٌ أَكْثَرُ احْتِمَالًا فِي يَوْمِ الدِّينِ مِمَّا لَكُمَا.
23 And you, Capernaum, who are exalted to heaven, will be brought down to Hades; for if the mighty works which were done in you had been done in Sodom, it would have remained until this day.
Ⲛⲉⲙ ⲛ̀ⲑⲟ ϩⲱⲓ Ⲕⲁⲫⲁⲣⲛⲁⲟⲩⲙ ⲙⲏ ⲧⲉⲣⲁϭⲓⲥⲓ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ϩ̀ⲣⲏⲓ ⲉ̀ⲧ̀ⲫⲉ ⲉⲩⲉ̀ⲑⲉⲃⲓⲟ̀ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ϧ̀ⲣⲏⲓ ⲉ̀ⲁ̀ⲙⲉⲛϯ ϫⲉ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉ ϧⲉⲛ Ⲥⲟⲇⲟⲙⲁ ⲁⲩϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲛⲁⲓϫⲟⲙ ⲉ̀ⲧⲁⲩϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲛ̀ϧⲏϯ ⲛⲉ ⲓⲥϫⲉⲕ ⲥⲉϣⲟⲡ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ϧⲟⲩⲛ ⲉ̀ⲫⲟⲟⲩ.
23 وَأَنْتِ يَا كَفْرَنَاحُومَ، أَتَرْتَفِعِينَ إِلَى السَّمَاءِ؟! إِنَّكِ سَتُهْبَطِينَ إِلَى الْجَحِيمِ. لِأَنَّهُ لَوْ صُنِعَتْ فِي سَدُومَ هَذِهِ الْقُوَّاتُ الَّتِي صُنِعَتْ فِيكِ لَبَقِيَتْ إِلَى الْيَوْمِ.
24 But I say to you that it shall be more tolerable for the land of Sodom in the day of judgment than for you.”
Ⲡ̀ⲗⲏⲛ ϯϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ⲛⲱⲧⲉⲛ ϫⲉ ⲡⲕⲁϩⲓ ⲛ̀Ⲥⲟⲇⲟⲙⲁ ⲉⲩⲉ̀ϯⲁ̀ⲥⲟ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟϥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲡ̀ⲉ̀ϩⲟⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ϯⲕ̀ⲣⲓⲥⲓⲥ ⲉ̀ϩⲟⲧⲉⲣⲟ.
24 لَكِنَّنِي أَقُولُ لَكُمْ: إِنَّ أَرْضَ سَدُومَ ستَكُونُ لَهَا حَالَةٌ أَكْثَرُ احْتِمَالًا مِنْكِ فِي يَوْمِ الدِّينِ ".
25 At that time Jesus answered and said, “I thank You, Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that You have hidden these things from the wise and prudent and have revealed them to babes.
Ⲛ̀ϩ̀ⲣⲏⲓ ⲇⲉ ϧⲉⲛ ⲡⲓⲥⲏⲟⲩ ⲉ̀ⲧⲉⲙ̀ⲙⲁⲩ ⲁϥⲉ̀ⲣⲟⲩⲱ̀ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ Ⲓⲏ︦ⲥ︦ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ϫⲉ ϯⲟⲩⲱⲛϩ ⲛⲁⲕ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ Ⲫ̀ⲓⲱⲧ Ⲡⲟ︦ⲥ︦ ⲛ̀ⲧ̀ⲫⲉ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲡ̀ⲕⲁϩⲓ ϫⲉ ⲁⲕϩⲉⲡ ⲛⲁⲓ ⲉ̀ϩⲁⲛⲥⲁⲃⲉⲩ ⲛⲉⲙ ϩⲁⲛⲕⲁⲧϩⲏ ⲧ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁⲕϭⲟⲣⲡⲟⲩ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ⲛ̀ϩⲁⲛⲕⲟⲩϫⲓ ⲛ̀ⲁ̀ⲗⲱⲟⲩⲓ̀.
25 فِي ذلِكَ الْوَقْتِ أَجَابَ يَسُوعُ وَقَالَ: " أَشْكُرُكَ أَيُّهَا الْآبُ رَبُّ السَّمَاءِ وَالأَرْضِ، لِأَنَّكَ أَخْفَيْتَ هذِهِ عَنِ الْحُكَمَاءِ وَالْفُهَمَاءِ وَأَعْلَنْتَهَا لِلأَطْفَالِ.
26 Even so, Father, for so it seemed good in Your sight.
Ⲁ̀ϩⲁ Ⲫ̀ⲓⲱⲧ ϫⲉ ⲫⲁⲓ ⲡⲉ ⲡⲓϯⲙⲁϯ ⲉ̀ⲧⲁϥϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉⲕⲙ̀ⲑⲟ.
26 نَعَمْ أَيُّهَا الْآبُ، لِأَنَّ هَذِهِ هِيَ الْمَسَرَّةُ الَّتِي صَارَتْ أَمَامَكَ.
27 All things have been delivered to Me by My Father, and no one knows the Son except the Father. Nor does anyone know the Father except the Son, and the one to whom the Son wills to reveal Him.
Ϩⲱⲃ ⲛⲓⲃⲉⲛ ⲁ̀ Ⲫ̀ⲓⲱⲧ ⲧⲏⲓⲧⲟⲩ ⲉ̀ⲧⲟⲧ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲛ ϩ̀ⲗⲓ ⲥⲱⲟⲩⲛ ⲙ̀Ⲡ̀ϣⲏⲣⲓ ⲉ̀ⲃⲏⲗ ⲉ̀Ⲫ̀ⲓⲱⲧ ⲟⲩⲇⲉ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲛ ϩ̀ⲗⲓ ⲥⲱⲟⲩⲛ ⲙ̀Ⲫ̀ⲓⲱⲧ ⲉ̀ⲃⲏⲗ ⲉ̀Ⲡ̀ϣⲏⲣⲓ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲫⲏⲉ̀ⲧⲉϩⲛⲉ Ⲡ̀ϣⲏⲣⲓ ⲉ̀ϭⲱⲣⲡ ⲛⲁϥ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ.
27 كُلُّ شَيْءٍ قَدْ دُفِعَ إلَيَّ مِنْ أَبِي، وَلَيْسَ أَحَدٌ يَعْرِفُ الاِبْنَ إِلَّا الْآبُ، وَلَا أَحَدٌ يَعْرِفُ الْآبَ إِلَّا الاِبْنُ وَمَنْ أَرَادَ الاِبْنُ أَنْ يُعْلِنَ لَهُ.
28 Come to Me, all you who labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest.
Ⲁ̀ⲙⲱⲓⲛⲓ ϩⲁⲣⲟⲓ ⲟⲩⲟⲛ ⲛⲓⲃⲉⲛ ⲉⲧϧⲟⲥⲓ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉⲧⲟⲡⲧ ϧⲁ ⲛⲟⲩⲉⲧⲫⲱⲟⲩⲓ̀ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁ̀ⲛⲟⲕ ⲉⲑⲛⲁϯⲙ̀ⲧⲟⲛ ⲛⲱⲧⲉⲛ.
28 تَعَالَوْا إِلَيَّ يَا جَمِيعَ الْمُتْعَبِينَ وَالثَّقِيلِي الْأَحْمَالِ، وَأَنَا أُرِيحُكُمْ.
29 Take My yoke upon you and learn from Me, for I am gentle and lowly in heart, and you will find rest for your souls.
Ⲁ̀ⲗⲓⲟⲩⲓ̀ ⲙ̀ⲡⲁⲛⲁϩⲃⲉϥ ⲉ̀ϫⲉⲛ ⲑⲏⲛⲟⲩ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁ̀ⲣⲓⲉ̀ⲙⲓ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲓ ϫⲉ ⲁ̀ⲛⲟⲕ ⲟⲩⲣⲉⲙⲣⲁⲩϣ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ϯⲑⲉⲃⲓⲏⲟⲩⲧ ϧⲉⲛ ⲡⲁϩⲏⲧ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉ̀ⲣⲉⲧⲉⲛⲉ̀ϫⲓⲙⲓ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩⲙⲁⲛⲉⲙⲧⲟⲛ ⲛ̀ⲛⲉⲧⲉⲛⲯⲩⲭⲏ.
29 اِحْمِلُوا نِيرِي عَلَيْكُمْ وَتَعَلَّمُوا مِنِّي؛ لِأَنِّي وَدِيعٌ وَمُتَوَاضِعُ الْقَلْبِ، فَتَجِدُوا رَاحَةً لِنُفُوسِكُمْ.
30 For My yoke is easy and My burden is light.”
Ⲡⲁⲛⲁϩⲃⲉϥ ⲅⲁⲣ ϥ̀ϩⲟⲗϫ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲧⲁⲉⲧⲫⲱ ⲁ̀ⲥⲓⲱ̀ⲟⲩ
30 لِأَنَّ نِـيرِي هَــيِّنٌ وَحِمْلِــي خَفِيـفٌ ".