Prophecies
النبوآت
	Proverbs 1:20-33
(أمثال 1: 20-33)
A reading from the Proverbs of Solomon the prophet. May his holy blessings be with us. Amen.
Ⲉⲃⲟⲗϧⲉⲛ ⲛⲓⲡⲁⲣⲟⲓⲙⲓⲁ̀ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ Ⲥⲟⲗⲟⲙⲱⲛ ⲡⲓⲡ̀ⲣⲟⲫⲏⲧⲏⲥ: ⲉ̀ⲣⲉⲡⲉϥⲥ̀ⲙⲟⲩ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ ϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲛⲉⲙⲁⲛ ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ ⲉϥϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ:
من أمثال سليمان النبي بركته المقدسة تكون معنا. آمين.
20 Wisdom calls aloud outside; She raises her voice in the open squares.
20 الْحِكْمَةُ تُمْدَحُ فِي الطُّرُقَاتِ. وَفِي الشَّوَارِعِ ظَاهِرَةٌ.
21 She cries out on the top of the walls,and sits by the gates of princes; and at the gates of the city boldly says:
21 وَعَلَى زَوَايَا الْأَسْوَارِ يُبَشَّرُ بِهَا. عَلَى أَبْوَابِ الْأَقْوِيَاءِ وَأَبْوَابِ الْمُدُنِ قَدْ قَالَتْ بِقَلْبٍ قَوِيٍّ فِي كُلِّ حِينٍ:
22 So long as the simple cleave to justice, they shall not be ashamed: but the foolish being lovers of haughtiness, having become ungodly have hated knowledge, and are become subject to reproofs.
22 إِنَّ عَدِيمِي الشَّرِّ يَتَمَسَّكُونَ بِالْبِرِّ، فَلَنْ يُخْزَوْا. أَيُّهَا الْجُهَّالُ الْمُشْتَهُونَ الْعَارَ الَّذِينَ نَافَقُوا وَأَبْغَضُوا الْفَهْمَ، وَصَارُوا عُرْضَةً لِلتَّوْبِيخِ،
23 Surely I will pour out my spirit on you; I will make my words known to you.
23 هُوَذَا أَضَعُ أَمَامَكُمْ كَلَامًا مِنْ رُوحِي. وَأُعَلِّمُكُمْ كَلَامِي،
24 Because I have called and you refused, I have stretched out my hand and no one regarded,
24 قَدْ دَعَوْتُ فَلَمْ تَسْمَعُوا، وَبَسَطْتُ يَدَيَّ فَلَمْ تَلْتَفِتُوا،
25 Because you disdained all my counsel, And would have none of my rebuke,
25 بَلْ جَعَلْتُمْ مَشُورَتِي كَأَنَّهَا لَيْسَتْ ثَابِتَةً، وَتَوْبِيخِي لَمْ تُصْغُوا إِلَيْهِ.
26 I also will laugh at your calamity; I will mock when your terror comes,
26 مِنْ أَجْلِ هَذَا أَنَا أَيْضًا أَضْحَكُ عَلَى هَلَاكِكُمْ، وَأَفْرَحُ إِذَا لَحِقَكُمُ الْفَنَاءُ وَفَاجَأَكَمُ الذُّعْرُ.
27 When your terror comes like a storm, And your destruction comes like a whirlwind, When distress and anguish come upon you.
27 َيَأْتِي الْخَرَابُ كَالْعَاصِفَةِ. إِذَا جَاءَ عَلَيْكُمُ الاِسْتِئْصَالُ وَحَلَّ بِكُمُ الضِّيقُ وَالْهَلَاكُ.
28 “Then they will call on me, but I will not answer; They will seek me diligently, but they will not find me.
28 فَيَكُونُ إِذَا دَعَوْتُمُونِي لَا أُجِيبُ. يُبَكِّرُ الْأَشْرَارُ فِي طَلَبِي فَلَا يَجِدُونَنِي.
29 Because they hated knowledge And did not choose the fear of the Lord,
29 بِمَا أَنَّهُمْ أَبْغَضُوا الْحِكْمَةَ وَلَمْ يَخْتَارُوا مَخَافَةَ الرَّبِّ.
30 They would have none of my counsel And despised my every rebuke.
30 وَلَمْ يُرِيدُوا أَنْ يَتَأَمَّلُوا مَشُورَتِي، مُسْتَهْزِئِينَ بِكَلَامِي.
31 Therefore they shall eat the fruit of their own way, And be filled to the full with their own fancies.
31 فَلِذَلِكَ يَأْكُلُونَ مِنْ ثَمَرِ طَرِيقِهِمْ، وَمِنْ نِفَاقِهِمْ يَشْبَعُونَ.
32 For they wronged the simple, they shall be slain; And the complacency of fools will destroy them.
32 حَيْثُ أَنَّهُمْ ظَلَمُوا الصِّبْيَانَ وَقَتَلُوهُمْ، أَفْتَقِدُ الْمُنَافِقِينَ بِالْهَلَاكِ،
33 But whoever listens to me will dwell safely, And will be secure, without fear of evil.”
33 وَالَّذِي يُطِيعُنِي يَسْكُنُ عَلَى رَجَاءٍ وَيَسْتَرِيحُ بِلَا خَوْفٍ مِنْ كُلِّ شَرٍّ.
Glory be to the Holy Trinity, our God, forever and unto the ages of all ages. Amen.
Ⲟⲩⲱ̀ⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ϯⲧ̀ⲣⲓⲁⲥ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ Ⲡⲉⲛⲛⲟⲩϯ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛⲉⲙ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲛⲓⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲧⲏⲣⲟⲩ: ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ.
مجداً للثالوث القدوس إلهنا الى أبد الآبدين كلها آمين.
	Isaiah 8:13-9:7
(اشعياء 8: 13-9: 7)
A reading from Isaiah, the prophet. May his holy blessings be with us. Amen.
Ⲉⲃⲟⲗϧⲉⲛ Ⲏⲥⲁⲏ̀ⲁⲥ ⲡⲓⲡ̀ⲣⲟⲫⲏⲧⲏⲥ: ⲉ̀ⲣⲉⲡⲉϥⲥ̀ⲙⲟⲩ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ ϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲛⲉⲙⲁⲛ ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ ⲉϥϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ:
من اشعياء النبي بركته المقدسة تكون معنا. آمين.
13 The Lord of hosts, Him you shall hallow; Let Him be your fear, And let Him be your dread.
13 قَدِّسُوا رَبَّ الْجُنُودِ وَلْيَكُنْ هُوَ خَوْفَكُمْ وَرَهْبَتَكُمْ.
14 He will be as a sanctuary, But a stone of stumbling and a rock of offense To both the houses of Israel, As a trap and a snare to the inhabitants of Jerusalem.
14 فَيَكُونَ لَكُمْ قُدْسًا وَيَكُونَ حَجَرَ صَدْمَةٍ وَصَخْرَةَ عَثْرَةٍ لِبَيْتِ يَعْقُوبَ، وَفَخًّا وَشَرَكًا لِسَاكِنِيِ أُورُشَلِيمَ.
15 And many among them shall stumble; They shall fall and be broken, Be snared and taken.”
15 فَلِهَذَا يَعْثُرُ بِهِ كَثِيرُونَ وَيَسْقُطُونَ، وَيَنْحَطِمُونَ وَيُحْتَبَلُونَ وَيُؤْخَذُونَ.
16 Bind up the testimony, Seal the law among my disciples.
16 أَرْسُمُ الشَّهَادَةَ، أَطْبَعُ الشَّرِيعَةَ فِي تَلَامِيذِي.
17 And I will wait on the Lord, Who hides His face from the house of Jacob; And I will hope in Him.
17 إِنِّي أَرْجُو اللَّهَ الْحَاجِبَ وَجْهَهُ عَنْ بَيْتِ يَعْقُوبَ وَأَتَوَكَّلُ عَلَيْهِ.
18 Here am I and the children whom the Lord has given me! We are for signs and wonders in Israel From the Lord of hosts, Who dwells in Mount Zion.
18 هَأَنَذَا وَالْأَوْلَادُ الَّذِينَ أَعْطَانِيهِمِ الرَّبُّ، يَكُونُونَ آيَاتٍ وَعَجَائِبَ فِي بَيْتِ إِسْرَائِيلَ مِنْ لَدُنِ رَبِّ الْجُنُودِ السَّاكِنِ فِي جَبَلِ صِهْيَوْنَ.
19 And when they say to you, “Seek those who are mediums and wizards, who whisper and mutter,” should not a people seek their God? Should they seek the dead on behalf of the living?
19 فَإِذَا قَالُوا لَكُمْ اِسْأَلُوا ذَوِي التَّوَابِعِ وَالْعَرَّافِينَ الْمُشَقْشِقِينَ الْهَامِسِينَ. فَقُولُوا أَلَيْسَ كُلُّ شَعْبٍ يَسْأَلُ إِلَهَهُ؟ أَيُسْأَلُ الْأَمْوَاتُ عَنِ الْأَحْيَاءِ؟
20 To the law and to the testimony! If they do not speak according to this word, it is because there is no light in them.
20 بَلِ اسْأَلُوا الشَّرِيعَةَ وَالشَّهَادَةَ. مَنْ لَمْ يَنْطِقْ بِهَذَا الْكَلَامِ فَلَا يُضِيءُ لَهُ الصُّبْحُ.
21 They will pass through it hard-pressed and hungry; and it shall happen, when they are hungry, that they will be enraged and curse their king and their God, and look upward.
21 فَيَتِيهُ فِي الْأَرْضِ مَكْرُوبًا جَائِعًا. وَفِي جُوعِهِ يَسْتَشِيطُ وَيَلْعَنُ مَلِكَهُ وَإِلَهَهُ وَيَلْتَفِتُ إِلَى فَوْقُ.
22 Then they will look to the earth, and see trouble and darkness, gloom of anguish; and they will be driven into darkness.
22 وَيَنْظُرُ إِلَى الْأَرْضِ فَإِذَا الشِّدَّةُ وَالظُّلْمَةُ، ولَيْلُ الضِّيقِ، وسَوَادُ الْقَلَاقِلِ.
1 Nevertheless the gloom will not be upon her who is distressed, As when at first He lightly esteemed The land of Zebulun and the land of Naphtali, And afterward more heavily oppressed her, By the way of the sea, beyond the Jordan, In Galilee of the Gentiles.
1 فَقَدْ زَادَ اللَّيْلُ عَنِ الَّتِي كَانَتْ فِي الضِّيقِ. إِنَّ الزَّمَانَ الْأَوَّلَ كَرَّ سَرِيعًا عَلَى أَرْضِ زَبُولُونَ وَأَرْضِ نَفْتَالِيَ، وَأَمَّا الْأَخِيرُ فَأَكْرَمَ طَرِيقَ الْبَحْرِ، عَبْرَ الْأُرْدُنِّ، جَلِيلَ الْأُمَمِ.
2 The people who walked in darkness Have seen a great light; Those who dwelt in the land of the shadow of death, Upon them a light has shined.
2 الشَّعْبُ السَّالِكُ فِي الظُّلْمَةِ أَبْصَرَ نُورًا عَظِيمًا، الْجَالِسُونَ فِي بُقْعَةِ الْمَوْتِ وَظِلَالِهِ أَشْرَقَ عَلَيْهِمْ نُورٌ.
3 You have multiplied the nation And increased its joy; They rejoice before You According to the joy of harvest, As men rejoice when they divide the spoil.
3 أَكْثَرْتَ الأُمَّةَ. وَعَظَّمْتَ لَهَا الْفَرَحَ. يَفْرَحُونَ أَمَامَكَ كَالْفَرَحِ فِي الْحَصَادِ. كَابْتِهَاجِ الَّذِينَ يَقْتَسِمُونَ الْغَنِيمَةَ.
4 For You have broken the yoke of his burden And the staff of his shoulder, The rod of his oppressor, As in the day of Midian.
4 لِأَنَّ نِيرَ مَشَقَّتِهَا، وَعَصَا كَتِفِهَا، وَقَضِيبَ مُسَخِّرِهَا قَدْ كَسَّرْتَهَا كَمَا فِي يَوْمِ مِدْيَانَ.
5 For every warrior’s sandal from the noisy battle, And garments rolled in blood, Will be used for burning and fuel of fire.
5 إِذْ كُلُّ سِلَاحِ مُتَسَلِّحٍ فِي الْوَغَى وَكُلُّ ثَوْبٍ مُتَلَطِّخٍ بِالدِّمَاءِ، يَصِيرُ ضَرَمًا وَمَأْكَلًا لِلنَّارِ.
6 For unto us a Child is born, Unto us a Son is given; And the government will be upon His shoulder. And His name will be called Wonderful, Counselor, Mighty God, Everlasting Father, Prince of Peace.
6 لِأَنَّهُ يُولَدُ لَنَا وَلَدٌ وَنُعْطَى ابْنًا، وَتَكُونُ الرِّئَاسَةُ عَلَى كَتِفِهِ، وَيُدْعَى اِسْمُهُ عَجِيبًا، مُشِيرًا، إِلَهًا جَبَّارًا، أَبًا أَبَدِيًّا، رَئِيسَ السَّلَامِ.
7 Of the increase of His government and peace There will be no end, Upon the throne of David and over His kingdom, To order it and establish it with judgment and justice From that time forward, even forever. The zeal of the Lord of hosts will perform this.
7 لِنُمُوِّ الرِّيَاسَةِ، وَالسَّلَامِ لَا اِنْقِضَاءَ لَهُ عَلَى عَرْشِ دَاوُدَ وَمَمْلَكَتِهِ، لِيُثَبِّتَهَا وَيَعْضُدُهَا بِالْحَقِّ وَالْبِرِّ، مِنَ الْآنَ إِلَى الْأَبَدِ، إِنَّ غَيْرَةَ رَبِّ الْجُنُودِ تَصْنَعُ هَذَا.
Glory be to the Holy Trinity, our God, forever and unto the ages of all ages. Amen.
Ⲟⲩⲱ̀ⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ϯⲧ̀ⲣⲓⲁⲥ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ Ⲡⲉⲛⲛⲟⲩϯ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛⲉⲙ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲛⲓⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲧⲏⲣⲟⲩ: ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ.
مجداً للثالوث القدوس إلهنا الى أبد الآبدين كلها آمين.