Stand in the fear of God and listen to the Holy Gospel. A reading from the Gospel according to our teacher Saint Luke the Evangelist, and the pure disciple. May his blessings be with us all.
قِفُوا بِخَوْفِ اللهِ، وَأَنْصِتُوا لِسَمَاعِ الإِنْجِيلِ الْمُقَدَّسِ. فَصْلٌ مِنْ بِشَارَةِ الإِنْجِيلِ لِمُعَلِّمِنَا مَارْ لوقا الْبَشِيرِ، التِّلْمِيذِ الطَّاهِرِ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
From the Psalms of our teacher David the prophet. May his blessings be with us all.
مِنْ مَزَامِيرِ تَرَاتِيلِ مُعَلِّمِنَا دَاوُدَ النَّبِيِّ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
Matins Psalm
المزمور
	Psalms 29: 1-2
(مزامير 29: 1-2)
I will exalt You, O Lord, for You have lifted me up, And have not let my foes rejoice over me. O Lord my God, I cried out to You, And You healed me.
Ϯⲛⲁϭⲁⲥⲕ Ⲡⲟ︦ⲥ︦ ϫⲉ ⲁⲕϣⲟⲡⲧ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟⲕ: ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉⲕⲑ̀ⲣⲉ ⲛⲁϫⲁϫⲓ ⲟⲩⲛⲟϥ ⲙ̀ⲙⲱⲟⲩ ⲉ̀ϩ̀ⲣⲏⲓ ⲉ̀ϫⲱⲓ: Ⲡⲟ︦ⲥ︦ ⲡⲁⲛⲟⲩϯ ⲁⲓⲱϣ ⲟⲩⲃⲏⲕ: ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁⲕⲧⲁⲗϭⲟⲓ: ⲁ︦ⲗ︦.
أُعَظِّمُكَ يَارَبُّ لِأَنَّكَ اِحْتَضَنْتَنِي، وَلَمْ تُشْمِتْ بِي أَعْدَائِي. أَيُّهَا الرَّبُّ إِلَهِي صَرَخْتُ إِلَيْكَ، فَشَفَيْتَنِي.
People:
Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
الليلويا.
	Psalm Trailer for the Pope or a Bishop
(Ⲙⲁⲣⲟⲩϭⲁⲥϥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲧ̀ⲉⲕⲕ̀ⲗⲏⲥⲓⲁ̀...)
People:
Amen Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲙⲏⲛ Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
امين الليلويا.
Then the introduction to the Gospel is read.
ثم تقال مقدمة الأنجيل وهي:
Reader:
Blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord. Our Lord, God, Savior and King of us all, Jesus Christ, Son of the living God to whom is glory forever. Amen.
القارﺉُ:
مباركٌ الآتي باسمِ الربِّ إلهِ القواتِ، ربُّنا وإلهُنا ومخلصُنا وملكُنا كلِّنا، يسوعُ المسيحُ، ابنُ اللهِ الحيِّ، الذي لهُ المجدُ إلى الأبدِ. آمين.
Matins Gospel
الإنجيل
	Luke 5:12-16
(لوقا 5: 12-16)
12 And it happened when He was in a certain city, that behold, a man who was full of leprosy saw Jesus; and he fell on his face and implored Him, saying, “Lord, if You are willing, You can make me clean.”
Ⲁⲥϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲇⲉ ⲉⲧⲁⲩⲓ̀ ⲉ̀ϧⲟⲩⲛ ⲉ̀ⲟⲩⲓ̀ ⲛ̀ⲛⲓⲃⲁⲕⲓ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲓⲥ ⲟⲩⲣⲱⲙⲓ ⲉϥⲙⲉϩ ⲛ̀ⲥⲉϩⲧ ⲉⲧⲁϥⲛⲁⲩ ⲇⲉ ⲉ̀Ⲓⲏ︦ⲥ︦ ϥϩⲓⲧϥ ⲉ̀ϫⲉⲛ ⲡⲉϥϩⲟ ⲉϥϯϩⲟ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟϥ ⲉϥϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ϫⲉ ⲡⲁϫ︦ⲥ︦ ⲁⲕϣⲁⲛⲟⲩⲱϣ ⲟⲩⲟⲛ ϣ̀ϫⲟⲙ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲕ ⲉ̀ⲧⲟⲩⲃⲟⲓ.
12 وَلَمَّا دَخَلَ فِي إِحْدَى الْمُدُنِ، إِذَا بِرَجُلٌ مَمْلُوءٌ بَرَصًا. فَلَمَّا رَأَى يَسُوعَ خَرَّ عَلَى وَجْهِهِ وَسَأَلَهُ قَائِلًا: " يَا رَبُّ، إِنْ شِئْتَ فَأَنْتَ قَادِرٌ أَنْ تُطهِّرَنِي ".
13 Then He put out His hand and touched him, saying, “I am willing; be cleansed.” Immediately the leprosy left him.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁϥⲥⲟⲩⲧⲉⲛ ⲉϥϫⲓϫ ⲉⲃⲟⲗ ⲁϥ ϭⲓ ⲛⲉⲙⲁϥ ⲉϥϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ϫⲉ ϯⲟⲩⲱϣ ⲙⲁⲧⲟⲩⲃⲟ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲥⲁⲧⲟⲧϥ ⲁϥϣⲉ ⲛⲁϥ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ϩⲁⲣⲟϥ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲡⲓⲥⲉϩⲧ.
13 فَمَدَّ يَدَهُ وَلَمَسَهُ قَائِلًا: " قَدْ شِئْتُ، فَاطْهُرْ ". وَلِلْوَقْتِ ذَهَبَ عَنْهُ الْبَرَصُ.
14 And He charged him to tell no one, “But go and show yourself to the priest, and make an offering for your cleansing, as a testimony to them, just as Moses commanded.”
Ⲛ̀ⲑⲟϥ ⲇⲉ ϥϩⲟⲛϩⲉⲛ ⲛⲁϥ ⲉϥϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ϫⲉ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉⲣϫⲟⲥ ⲛ̀ϩ̀ⲗⲓ ⲁⲗⲗⲁ ⲙⲁϣⲉ ⲛⲁⲕ ⲙⲁⲧⲁⲙⲉ ⲡⲓⲟⲩⲏⲃ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟⲕ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁ̀ⲛⲓⲟⲩⲓ ⲉ̀ϫⲉⲛ ⲡⲉⲕⲧⲟⲩⲃⲟ ⲕⲁⲧⲁⲫ̀ⲣⲏϯ ⲧⲁϥⲟⲩⲁϩⲥⲁϩⲛⲓ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲙⲱⲩ̀ⲥⲏⲥ ⲉⲩⲙⲉⲧⲙⲉⲑⲣⲉ ⲛⲱⲟⲩ.
14 فَأَمَرَهُ: أَنْ لَا يَقُولْ لِأَحَدٍ، بَلِ " اِذْهَبْ فَأَرِ نَفْسَكَ لِلْكَاهِنِ، وَقَدِّمْ عَنْ تَطْهِيرِكَ كَمَا أَمَرَ مُوسَى شَهَادَةً لَهُمْ ".
15 However, the report went around concerning Him all the more; and great multitudes came together to hear, and to be healed by Him of their infirmities.
Ⲁϥⲥⲱⲣ ⲇⲉ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ⲛ̀ϩⲟⲩⲟ̀ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲡⲓⲥⲁϫⲓ ⲉⲑⲃⲏⲧϥ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁⲩⲑⲱⲟⲩϯ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲁⲛⲛⲓϣϯ ⲙ̀ⲙⲏϣ ⲉ̀ⲥⲱⲧⲉⲙ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟϥ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉ̀ⲉⲣⲫⲁϧⲣⲓ ⲉ̀ⲣⲱⲟⲩ ϧⲉⲛ ⲛⲟⲩϣⲱⲛⲓ.
15 فَازْدَادَ خَبَرُهُ شُيُوعًا. وَاِجْتَمَعَ إِلَيْهِ كَثِيرٌ مِنَ الجُمُوعِ لِيَسْتَمِعُوا إِلَيْهِ، وَيُشْفَوْا مِنْ أَمْرَاضِهِمْ.
16 So He Himself often withdrew into the wilderness and prayed.
Ⲛ̀ⲑⲟϥ ⲇⲉ ⲛⲉϣⲁϥϣⲉ ⲛⲁϥ ⲉ̀ⲛⲓⲙⲁⲛ̀ϣⲁϥⲉ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉϥⲉⲣⲡ̀ⲣⲟⲥⲉⲩⲭⲉⲥⲑⲉ.
16 أَمَّا هُوَ فَكَانَ يَعْتَزِلُ فِي الْقِفَارِ لِيُصَلِّيَ.