Stand in the fear of God and listen to the Holy Gospel. A reading from the Gospel according to our teacher Saint Luke the Evangelist, and the pure disciple. May his blessings be with us all.
قِفُوا بِخَوْفِ اللهِ، وَأَنْصِتُوا لِسَمَاعِ الإِنْجِيلِ الْمُقَدَّسِ. فَصْلٌ مِنْ بِشَارَةِ الإِنْجِيلِ لِمُعَلِّمِنَا مَارْ لوقا الْبَشِيرِ، التِّلْمِيذِ الطَّاهِرِ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
From the Psalms of our teacher David the prophet. May his blessings be with us all.
مِنْ مَزَامِيرِ تَرَاتِيلِ مُعَلِّمِنَا دَاوُدَ النَّبِيِّ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
Liturgy Psalm
المزمور
	Psalms 90:10,9
(مزامير 90: 10,9)
You shall tread upon the lion and the cobra, The young lion and the serpent you shall trample underfoot. For He shall give His angels charge over you, To keep you in all your ways.
Ⲉⲕⲉ̀ϩⲱⲙⲓ ⲉ̀ϫⲉⲛ ⲟⲩϩⲟϥ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲟⲩⲃⲁⲥⲓⲗⲓⲥⲕⲟⲥ: ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉⲕⲉ̀ϧⲟⲙϧⲉⲙ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩⲙⲟⲩⲓ̀ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲟⲩⲇ̀ⲣⲁⲕⲱⲛ: ϫⲉ ϥ̀ⲛⲁϩⲟⲛϩⲉⲛ ⲉ̀ⲧⲟⲧⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ⲛⲉϥⲁⲅⲅⲉⲗⲟⲛ ⲉⲑⲃⲏⲧⲕ: ⲉⲑⲣⲟⲩⲁ̀ⲣⲉϩ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟⲕ ϩⲓ ⲛⲉⲕⲙⲱⲓⲧ ⲧⲏⲣⲟⲩ. ⲁ︦ⲗ︦.
وَعَلَى الأَفْعَى وَمَلِكِ الْحَيَّاتِ تَطَأُ. وَتَسْحَقُ الأَسَدَ وَالتِّنِّينَ. لِأَنَّهُ يُوصِي مَلَائِكَتَهُ مِنْ أَجْلِكَ، لِيَحْفَظُوكَ في سَائِرِ طُرُقِكَ. هَلِّلُويَا.
People:
Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
الليلويا.
	Psalm Trailer for the Pope or a Bishop
(Ⲙⲁⲣⲟⲩϭⲁⲥϥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲧ̀ⲉⲕⲕ̀ⲗⲏⲥⲓⲁ̀...)
People:
Amen Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲙⲏⲛ Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
امين الليلويا.
Then the introduction to the Gospel is read.
ثم تقال مقدمة الأنجيل وهي:
Reader:
Blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord. Our Lord, God, Savior and King of us all, Jesus Christ, Son of the living God to whom is glory forever. Amen.
القارﺉُ:
مباركٌ الآتي باسمِ الربِّ إلهِ القواتِ، ربُّنا وإلهُنا ومخلصُنا وملكُنا كلِّنا، يسوعُ المسيحُ، ابنُ اللهِ الحيِّ، الذي لهُ المجدُ إلى الأبدِ. آمين.
Liturgy Gospel
الإنجيل
	Luke 10:21-24
(لوقا 10: 21-24)
21 In that hour Jesus rejoiced in the Spirit and said, “I thank You, Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that You have hidden these things from the wise and prudent and revealed them to babes. Even so, Father, for so it seemed good in Your sight.
Ⲛ̀ϩ̀ⲣⲏⲓ ⲇⲉ ϧⲉⲛ ϯⲟⲩⲛⲟⲩ ⲉ̀ⲧⲉⲙ̀ⲙⲁⲩ ⲁϥⲑⲉⲗⲏⲗ ϧⲉⲛ ⲡⲓⲡⲛ︦ⲁ︦ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ϫⲉ ϯⲟⲩⲱⲛϩ ⲛⲁⲕ ⲉⲃⲟⲗ ⲫ̀ⲓⲱⲧ Ⲡⲟ︦ⲥ︦ ⲛ̀ⲧ̀ⲫⲉ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲡⲓⲕⲁϩⲓ ϫⲉ ⲁⲕϩⲉⲡ ⲛⲁⲓ ⲉ̀ϩⲁⲛⲥⲁⲃⲉⲩ ⲛⲉⲙ ϩⲁⲛⲕⲁⲧϩⲏⲧ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁⲕϭⲟⲣⲡⲟⲩ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ⲛ̀ϩⲁⲛⲕⲟⲩϫⲓ ⲛ̀ⲁ̀ⲗⲱⲟⲩⲓ̀ ⲁϩⲁ ⲫ̀ⲓⲱⲧ ϫⲉ ⲫⲁⲓ ⲡⲉ ⲙ̀ⲫ̀ⲣⲏϯ ⲙ̀ⲡⲓϯⲙⲁϯ ⲉⲧⲁϥϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉⲕⲙ̀ⲑⲟ.
21 وَفِي تِلْكَ السَّاعَةِ تَهَلَّلَ يَسُوعُ بِالرُّوحِ الْقُدُسِ وَقَالَ: " أَشْكُرُكَ أَيُّهَا الْآبُ، رَبُّ السَّمَاءِ وَالْأَرْضِ؛ لِأَنَّكَ أَخْفَيْتَ هَذِهِ عَنِ الْحُكَمَاءِ وَالْفُهَمَاءِ وَأَعْلَنْتَهَا لِلْأَطْفَالِ الصِّغَارِ. نَعَمْ أَيُّهَا الْآبُ، لِأَنْ هَكَذَا صَارَتِ الْمَسَرَّةُ أَمَامَكَ.
22 All things have been delivered to Me by My Father, and no one knows who the Son is except the Father, and who the Father is except the Son, and the one to whom the Son wills to reveal Him.”
Ϩⲱⲃ ⲛⲓⲃⲉⲛ ⲁⲩⲧⲏⲓⲧⲟⲩ ⲛⲏⲓ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉⲛ ⲡⲁⲓⲱⲧ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲛ ϩ̀ⲗⲓ ⲱⲟⲩⲛ ϫⲉ ⲛⲓⲙ ⲡⲉ ⲡ̀ϣⲏⲣⲓ ⲉ̀ⲃⲏⲗ ⲉ̀ⲫ̀ⲓⲱⲧ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ϫⲉ ⲛⲓⲙ ⲡⲉ ⲫ̀ⲓⲱⲧ ⲉ̀ⲃⲏⲗ ⲉ̀ⲡ̀ϣⲏⲣⲓ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲫⲏⲉⲧⲉ ⲡ̀ϣⲏⲣⲓ ⲟⲩⲱϣ ⲉ̀ϭⲱⲣⲡ ⲛⲁϥ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ.
22 كُلُّ شَيْءٍ قَدْ دُفِعَ إليَّ مِنْ أَبِي. وَلَيْسَ أَحَدٌ يَعْرِفُ مَنْ هُوَ الاِبْنُ إلَّا الْآبُ، وَمَنْ هُوَ الْآبُ إلَّا الاِبْنُ، وَمَنْ يُرِيدُ الاِبْنُ أَنْ يُعْلِنَ لَهُ ".
23 Then He turned to His disciples and said privately, “Blessed are the eyes which see the things you see;
Ⲩⲟϩ ⲉⲧⲁϥⲕⲟⲧϥ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϥⲙⲁⲑⲏⲧⲏⲥ ⲥⲁⲡ̀ⲥⲁ ⲙ̀ⲙⲁⲩⲁⲧⲟⲩ ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ϫⲉ ⲱⲟⲩⲛ̀ⲓⲁⲧⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ⲛⲓⲃⲁⲗ ⲉⲑⲛⲁⲩ ⲉ̀ⲛⲏⲉⲧⲉⲧⲉⲛⲛⲁⲩ ⲉ̀ⲣⲱⲟⲩ.
23 ثُمَّ عَادَ إِلَى تَلَامِيذِهِ عَلَى انْفَرَادٍ وَحْدَهُمْ وَقَالَ لَهُمْ: " طُوبَى لِلْعُيُونِ الَّتِي تَنْظُرُ مَا تَنْظُرُونَهُ!
24 for I tell you that many prophets and kings have desired to see what you see, and have not seen it, and to hear what you hear, and have not heard it.”
Ϯϫⲱ ⲁⲣ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ⲛⲱⲧⲉⲛ ϫⲉ ϩⲁⲛⲙⲏ ϣ ⲙ̀ⲡ̀ⲣⲟⲫⲏⲧⲏⲥ ⲛⲉⲙ ϩⲁⲛⲟⲩⲣⲱⲟⲩ ⲁⲩⲟⲩⲱϣ ⲉ̀ⲛⲁⲩ ⲉ̀ⲛⲏⲉⲧⲉⲧⲉⲛⲛⲁⲩ ⲉ̀ⲣⲱⲟⲩ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲙ̀ⲡⲟⲩⲛⲁⲩ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉⲥⲱⲧⲉⲙ ⲉ̀ⲛⲏⲉⲧⲉⲧⲉⲛⲥⲱⲧⲉⲙ ⲉ̀ⲣⲱⲟⲩ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲙ̀ⲡⲟⲩⲥⲱⲧⲉⲙ.
24 لأَنِّي أَقُولُ لَكُمْ: إِنَّ أَنْبِيَاءَ كَثِيرِينَ وَمُلُوكًا أَرَادُوا أَنْ يَنْظُرُوا مَا أَنْتُمْ تَنْظُرُونَ ولَمْ يَنْظُرُوا، وَأَنْ يَسْمَعُوا مَا أَنْتُمْ تَسْمَعُونَ ولَمْ يَسْمَعُوا ".