Stand in the fear of God and listen to the Holy Gospel. A reading from the Gospel according to our teacher Saint Luke the Evangelist, and the pure disciple. May his blessings be with us all.
قِفُوا بِخَوْفِ اللهِ، وَأَنْصِتُوا لِسَمَاعِ الإِنْجِيلِ الْمُقَدَّسِ. فَصْلٌ مِنْ بِشَارَةِ الإِنْجِيلِ لِمُعَلِّمِنَا مَارْ لوقا الْبَشِيرِ، التِّلْمِيذِ الطَّاهِرِ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
From the Psalms of our teacher David the prophet. May his blessings be with us all.
مِنْ مَزَامِيرِ تَرَاتِيلِ مُعَلِّمِنَا دَاوُدَ النَّبِيِّ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
Matins Psalm
المزمور
	Psalms 44:5,9
(مزامير 44: 5,9)
Gird Your sword upon Your thigh, O Mighty One, With Your glory and Your majesty. And in Your majesty ride prosperously. Your throne, O God, is forever and ever; A scepter of righteousness is the scepter of Your kingdom.
Ⲙⲟⲩⲣ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉⲕⲥⲏϥⲓ ⲉ̀ⲡⲉⲕⲁ̀ⲗⲟϫ ⲫⲏⲉ̀ⲧⲉ ⲟⲩⲟⲛ ϣ̀ϫⲟⲙ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟϥ: ⲛ̀ϩ̀ⲣⲏⲓ ϧⲉⲛ ⲧⲉⲕⲙⲉⲧⲃⲉⲣⲓ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲡⲉⲕⲥⲁⲓ ϭⲱⲗⲕ ⲙⲁⲙⲁϯ ⲁⲣⲓⲟⲩⲣⲟ: ⲡⲉⲕⲑ̀ⲣⲟⲛⲟⲥ Ⲫϯ ϣⲁⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲡⲓⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ: ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲡⲓϣ̀ⲃⲱⲧ ⲙ̀ⲡ̀ⲥⲱⲟⲩⲧⲉⲛ ⲡⲉ ⲡ̀ϣ̀ⲃⲱⲧ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲧⲉⲕⲙⲉⲧⲟⲩⲣⲟ. ⲁ︦ⲗ︦.
تَقَلَّدْ سَيْفَكَ عَلَى فَخْذِكَ أيُّهَا الْقَويُّ. بِحُسْنِكَ وَجَمَالِكَ اسْتَلَّهُ وَانْجَحْ وَامْلِكْ. كُرْسِيُّكَ يَا أَللَّهُ إِلَى دَهْرِ الدُّهُورِ، وَقَضِيبُ الاسْتِقَامَةِ هُوَ قَضِيبُ مُلْكِكَ. هَلِّلُويَا.
People:
Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
الليلويا.
	Psalm Trailer for the Pope or a Bishop
(Ⲙⲁⲣⲟⲩϭⲁⲥϥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲧ̀ⲉⲕⲕ̀ⲗⲏⲥⲓⲁ̀...)
People:
Amen Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲙⲏⲛ Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
امين الليلويا.
Then the introduction to the Gospel is read.
ثم تقال مقدمة الأنجيل وهي:
Reader:
Blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord. Our Lord, God, Savior and King of us all, Jesus Christ, Son of the living God to whom is glory forever. Amen.
القارﺉُ:
مباركٌ الآتي باسمِ الربِّ إلهِ القواتِ، ربُّنا وإلهُنا ومخلصُنا وملكُنا كلِّنا، يسوعُ المسيحُ، ابنُ اللهِ الحيِّ، الذي لهُ المجدُ إلى الأبدِ. آمين.
Matins Gospel
الإنجيل
	Luke 7:11-17
(لوقا 7: 11-17)
11 Now it happened, the day after, that He went into a city called Nain; and many of His disciples went with Him, and a large crowd.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁⲥϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲉ̀ⲡⲉϥⲣⲁⲥϯ ⲁϥϣⲉ ⲛⲁϥ ⲉ̀ⲟⲩⲃⲁⲕⲓ ⲉⲩⲙⲟⲩϯ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟⲥ ϫⲉ ⲛⲁⲓⲛ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛⲁⲩⲙⲟϣⲓ ⲛⲉⲙⲁϥ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲛⲉϥⲙⲁⲑⲏⲧⲏⲥ ⲉⲙ ⲟⲩⲛⲓϣϯ ⲙ̀ⲙⲏϣ.
11 وَلَمَّا صَارَ الْغَدُ مَضَى يَسُوعُ إِلَى مَدِينَةٍ تُدْعَى نَايِينَ، وَذَهَبَ مَعَهُ تَلَامِيذُهُ وَجَمْعٌ كَثِيرٌ.
12 And when He came near the gate of the city, behold, a dead man was being carried out, the only son of his mother; and she was a widow. And a large crowd from the city was with her.
Ϩⲱⲥⲇⲉ ⲉⲧⲁϥϧⲱⲛⲧ ⲉ̀ϯⲡⲩⲗⲏ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ϯⲃⲁⲕⲓ ϩⲏⲡⲡⲉ ⲛⲁⲩⲱⲗⲓ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩⲁⲓ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ⲉ̀ⲁϥⲙⲟⲩ ⲉ̀ⲟⲩϣⲏⲣⲓ ⲙ̀ⲙⲁⲩⲁⲧϥ ⲡⲉ ⲛⲧⲉ ⲧⲉϥⲙⲁⲩ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲑⲁⲓ ⲛⲉ ⲟⲩⲭⲏⲣⲁ ⲧⲉ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛⲉ ⲟⲩⲟⲛ ⲟⲩⲙⲏϣ ⲉϥⲟϣ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ϯⲃⲁⲕⲓ ⲛⲉⲙⲁⲥ ⲡⲉ.
12 فَلَمَّا اقْتَرَبَ مِنْ بَابِ الْمَدِينَةِ، إِذَا وَاحِدٌ مَحْمُولٌ قَدْ مَاتَ، وَهُوَ ابْنٌ وَحِيدٌ لِأُمِّهِ، وَكَانَتْ أَرْمَلَةً وَكَانَ مَعَهَا جَمْعٌ كَثِيرٌ مِنَ الْمَدِينَةِ.
13 When the Lord saw her, He had compassion on her and said to her, “Do not weep.”
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉⲧⲁϥⲛⲁⲩ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟⲥ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ Ⲓⲏ︦ⲥ︦ ϥϣⲉⲛϩⲏ ⲧ ϧⲁⲣⲟⲥ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ⲛⲁⲥ ϫⲉ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉⲣⲣⲓⲙⲓ.
13 فَلَمَّا رَآهَا يَسُوعُ تَرَاءَفَ عَلَيْهَا، وَقَالَ لَهَا: " لَا تَبْكِي ".
14 Then He came and touched the open coffin, and those who carried him stood still. And He said, “Young man, I say to you, arise.”
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁϥⲓ̀ ⲁϥϭⲓ ⲛⲉⲙ ϯⲥ̀ⲗⲏ ⲛⲏ ⲇⲉ ⲉⲧϥⲁⲓ ⲁⲩⲟϩⲓ ⲉ̀ⲣⲁⲧⲟⲩ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ϫⲉ ⲡⲓϧⲉⲗϣⲓ̀ⲣⲓ ⲛ̀ⲑⲟⲕ ⲡⲉϯϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ⲛⲁⲕ ⲧⲱⲛⲕ.
14 ثُمَّ تَقَدَّمَ وَلَمَسَ النَّعْشَ، فَوَقَفَ الْحَامِلُونَ. وَقَالَ: " أَيُّهَا الشَّابُّ، لَكَ أَنْتَ أَقُولُ: قُمْ ".
15 So he who was dead sat up and began to speak. And He presented him to his mother.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁϥϩⲉⲙⲥⲓ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲡⲓⲣⲉϥⲙⲱⲟⲩⲧ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁϥⲉⲣϩⲏⲧⲥ ⲛ̀ⲥⲁϫⲓ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁϥⲧⲏⲓϥ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉϥⲙⲁⲩ.
15 فَجَلَسَ الْمَيْتُ وَابْتَدَأَ يَتَكَلَّمُ، فَدَفَعَهُ إِلَى أُمِّهِ.
16 Then fear came upon all, and they glorified God, saying, “A great prophet has risen up among us”; and, “God has visited His people.”
Ⲟⲩϩⲟϯ ⲇⲉ ⲁⲥϭⲓ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩⲟⲛ ⲛⲓⲃⲉⲛ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛⲁⲩϯⲱⲟⲩ ⲙ̀ⲫϯ ⲉⲩϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ϫⲉ ⲟⲩⲛⲓϣϯ ⲙ̀ⲡ̀ⲣⲟⲫⲏⲧⲏⲥ ⲁϥⲧⲱⲛϥ ⲛ̀ϧⲏⲧⲉⲛ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ϫⲉ ⲁ ⲫϯ ϫⲉⲙⲡ̀ϣⲓⲛⲓ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉϥⲗⲁⲟⲥ.
16 فَاعْتَرَى الْجَمِيعَ خَوْفٌ، وَمَجَّدُوا اللَّهَ قَائِلِينَ: " قَدْ قَامَ فِينَا نَبِيٌّ عَظِيمٌ، وَتَفَقَّدَ اللَّهُ شَعْبَهُ ".
17 And this report about Him went throughout all Judea and all the surrounding region.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁϥⲓ̀ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲡⲓⲥⲁϫⲓ ⲉⲑⲃⲏⲧϥ ϧⲉⲛ ϯⲓⲟⲩⲇⲉⲁ̀ ⲧⲏⲣⲥ ⲛⲉⲙ ϯⲡⲉⲣⲓ ⲭⲱⲣⲟⲥ ⲧⲏⲣⲥ.
17 وَشَاعَ هَذَا الْكَلَامُ عَنْهُ في جَمِيعِ الْيَهُودِيَّةِ وَكُلِّ الْكُورَةِ.