Prophecies
النبوآت
	Genesis 32:1-30
(تكوين 32: 1-30)
A reading from the Book of Genesis of Moses the prophet. May his holy blessings be with us. Amen.
Ⲉⲃⲟⲗϧⲉⲛ Ⲡϫⲟⲙ ⲛ̀Ϯⲅⲉⲛⲉⲥⲓⲥ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ Ⲙⲱⲩ̀ⲥⲏⲥ ⲡⲓⲡ̀ⲣⲟⲫⲏⲧⲏⲥ: ⲉ̀ⲣⲉⲡⲉϥⲥ̀ⲙⲟⲩ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ ϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲛⲉⲙⲁⲛ ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ ⲉϥϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ:
من سفر تكوين لموسى النبي بركته المقدسة تكون معنا. آمين.
1 So Jacob went on his way, and the angels of God met him.
1 وَمَضَى يَعْقُوبُ فِي طَرِيقِهِ فَوَافَتْهُ مَلَائِكَةُ اللَّهِ.
2 When Jacob saw them, he said, “This is God’s camp.” And he called the name of that place Mahanaim.
2 فَقَالَ يَعْقُوبُ لَمَّا رَآهُمْ: هَذَا جُنْدُ اللَّهِ، وَسَمَّى ذَلِكَ الْمَوْضِعَ "مَحَنَايِمَ".
3 Then Jacob sent messengers before him to Esau his brother in the land of Seir, the country of Edom.
3 وَوَجَّهُ يَعْقُوبُ رُسُلًا قُدَّامَهُ إِلَى عِيسُوَ أَخِيهِ إِلَى أَرْضِ سَعِيرَ حَقْلِ أَدُومَ.
4 And he commanded them, saying, “Speak thus to my lord Esau, ‘Thus your servant Jacob says: “I have dwelt with Laban and stayed there until now.
4 وَأَوْصَاهُمْ قَائِلًا: " هَكَذَا قُولُوا لِسَيِّدِي عِيسُوَ: كَذَا قَالَ عَبْدُكَ يَعْقُوبُ: إِنِّي نَزَلْتُ عِنْدَ لَابَانَ فَلَبِثْتُ إِلَى الْآنَ.
5 I have oxen, donkeys, flocks, and male and female servants; and I have sent to tell my lord, that I may find favor in your sight.”’”
5 وَقَدْ صَارَ لِي بَقَرٌ وَحَمِيرٌ وَغَنَمٌ وَعَبِيدٌ وَإِمَاءٌ، وَبَعَثْتُ مَنْ يُخْبِرُ سَيِّدِي، لِأَنَالَ حُظْوَةً فِي عَيْنَيْكَ ".
6 Then the messengers returned to Jacob, saying, “We came to your brother Esau, and he also is coming to meet you, and four hundred men are with him.”
6 فَرَجَعَ الرُّسُلُ إِلَى يَعْقُوبَ قَائِلِينَ: " قَدْ صِرْنَا إِلَى أَخِيكَ عِيسُوَ، فَإِذَا هُوَ قَادِمٌ لِمُلْتَقَاكَ، وَمَعَهُ أَرْبَعُ مِئَةِ رَجُلٍ.
7 So Jacob was greatly afraid and distressed; and he divided the people that were with him, and the flocks and herds and camels, into two companies.
7 فَخَافَ يَعْقُوبُ جِدًّا وَضَاقَ بِهِ الْأَمْرُ، فَقَسَمَ الْقَوْمَ الَّذِينَ مَعَهُ وَالْغَنَمَ وَالْبَقَرَ وَالْجِمَالَ إِلَى فِرْقَتَيْنِ،
8 And he said, “If Esau comes to the one company and attacks it, then the other company which is left will escape.”
8 وَقَال: " إِنْ صَادَفَ عِيسُو إِحْدَى الْفِرْقَتَيْنِ فَأَهْلَكَهَا، نَجَتِ الْفِرْقَةُ الْأُخْرَى ".
9 Then Jacob said, “O God of my father Abraham and God of my father Isaac, the Lord who said to me, ‘Return to your country and to your family, and I will deal well with you’:
9 ثُمَّ قَالَ يَعْقُوبُ: " يَا إِلَهَ أَبِي إِبْرَاهِيمَ وَإِلَهَ أَبِي إِسْحَاقَ، الرَّبُّ الَّذِي قَالَ لِي: اِرْجِعْ إِلَى أَرْضِكَ وَإِلَى عَشِيرَتِكَ، وَأَنَا أُحْسِنُ إِلَيْكِ،
10 I am not worthy of the least of all the mercies and of all the truth which You have shown Your servant; for I crossed over this Jordan with my staff, and now I have become two companies.
10 ، أَنَا دُونَ أَنْ أَسْتَحِقَّ جَمِيعَ مَا صَنَعْتَ إِلَى عَبْدِكَ مِنَ الْمَرَاحِمِ وَالْوَفَاءِ، لِأَنِّي بِعَصَايَ عَبَرْتُ هَذَا الْأُرْدُنَّ، وَالْآنَ قَدْ صَارَ لِي فِرْقَتَانِ.
11 Deliver me, I pray, from the hand of my brother, from the hand of Esau; for I fear him, lest he come and attack me and the mother with the children.
11 فَأَنْقِذْنِي مِنْ يَدِ أَخِي، مِنْ يَدِ عِيسُوَ، فَإِنِّي أَخَافُ مِنْهُ أَنْ يَأْتِيَ فَيَقْتُلَنَا الْأُمَّهَاتِ مَعَ الْبَنِينَ.
12 For You said, ‘I will surely treat you well, and make your descendants as the sand of the sea, which cannot be numbered for multitude.’”
12 وَأَنْتَ قَدْ قُلْتَ: إِنِّي أُحْسِنُ إِلَيْكِ وَأَجْعَلُ نَسْلَكَ كَرَمْلِ الْبَحْرِ الَّذِي لَا يُحْصَى لِكَثْرَتِهِ ".
13 So he lodged there that same night, and took what came to his hand as a present for Esau his brother:
13 وَبَاتَ هُنَاكَ تِلْكَ اللَّيْلَةَ. وَفَرَزَ مِمَّا جَاءَ بِهِ مَعَهُ هَدِيَّةً لِعِيسُوَ أَخِيهِ:
14 two hundred female goats and twenty male goats, two hundred ewes and twenty rams,
14 مِئَتَيْ عَنْزٍ وَعِشْرِيْنَ تَيْسًا، وَمِئَتَيْ نَعْجَةٍ وَعِشْرِيْنَ كَبْشًا،
15 thirty milk camels with their colts, forty cows and ten bulls, twenty female donkeys and ten foals.
15 وَثَلَاثِينَ نَاقَةً مُرْضِعًا مَعَ أَوْلَادِهَا، وَأَرْبَعِينَ بَقَرَةً وَعَشَرَةَ ثِيرَانٍ، وَعِشْرِينَ أَتَانًا وَعَشَرَةَ جِحَاشٍ،
16 Then he delivered them to the hand of his servants, every drove by itself, and said to his servants, “Pass over before me, and put some distance between successive droves.”
16 وَدَفَعَهَا إِلَى أَيْدِي عَبِيدِهِ قَطِيعًا قَطِيعًا كُلًّا عَلَى حِدَةٍ، وَقَالَ لِعَبِيدِهِ: " تَقَدَّمُوا أَمَامِي وَأَبْقُوا مَسَافَةً بَيْنَ قَطِيعٍ وَقَطِيعٍ ".
17 And he commanded the first one, saying, “When Esau my brother meets you and asks you, saying, ‘To whom do you belong, and where are you going? Whose are these in front of you?’
17 وَأَوْصَى الْأَوَّلَ قَائِلًا: " إِنْ صَادَفَكَ عِيسُوَ أَخِي وَسَأَلَكَ فَقَالَ: لِمَنْ أَنْتَ وَإِلَى أَيْنَ تَمْضِي؟ وَلِمَنْ هَذَا الَّذِي بَيْنَ يَدَيْكَ؟
18 then you shall say, ‘They are your servant Jacob’s. It is a present sent to my lord Esau; and behold, he also is behind us.’”
18 فَقُلْ: لِعَبْدِكَ يَعْقُوبَ. هُوَ هَدِيَّةٌ مُرْسَلَةٌ إِلَى سَيِّدِي عِيسُوَ. وَهَا هُوذَا أَيْضًا وَرَاءَنَا ".
19 So he commanded the second, the third, and all who followed the droves, saying, “In this manner you shall speak to Esau when you find him;
19 وَأَوْصَى الثَّانِي بِمِثْلِ ذَلِكَ، وَأَيْضًا الثَّالِثَ، وَهَكَذَا سَائِرَ الْمَاضِينَ وَرَاءَ الْقُطْعَانِ قَائِلًا: " كَذَا تَقُولُونَ لِعِيسُوَ إِذَا لَقِيَكُمْ،
20 and also say, ‘Behold, your servant Jacob is behind us.’” For he said, “I will appease him with the present that goes before me, and afterward I will see his face; perhaps he will accept me.”
20 وَقُولُوا أَيْضًا: هُوَذَا عَبْدُكَ يَعْقُوبُ أَيْضًا وَرَاءَنَا ". لِأَنَّهُ قَالَ: " أَسْتَعْطِفُهُ أَوَّلًا بِالْهَدِيَّةِ الْمُتَقَدِّمَةِ أَمَامِي، وَبَعْدَ ذَلِكَ أَنْظُرُ وَجْهَهُ، لَعَلَّهُ يَرْضَى عَنِّي ".
21 So the present went on over before him, but he himself lodged that night in the camp.
21 فَتَقَدَّمَتْهُ الْهِدِيَّةُ، وَبَاتَ هُوَ تِلْكَ اللَّيْلَةَ فِي الْمَحَلَّةِ.
22 And he arose that night and took his two wives, his two female servants, and his eleven sons, and crossed over the ford of Jabbok.
22 وَقَامَ فِي تِلْكَ اللَّيْلَةَ فَأَخَذَ اِمْرَأَتَهُ وَأَمَتَيْهِ وَبَنِيهِ الْأَحَدَ عَشَرَ فَعَبَرَ مَخَاضَةَ يَبُّوقَ.
23 He took them, sent them over the brook, and sent over what he had.
23 أَخَذَهُمْ وَعَبَّرَهُمُ الْوَادِي، وَعَبَّرَ مَا كَانَ لَهُ.
24 Then Jacob was left alone; and a Man wrestled with him until the breaking of day.
24 وَبَقَيَ يَعْقُوبُ وَحْدَهُ. فَصَرَعَهُ رَجُلٌ إِلَى مَطْلَعِ الْفَجْرِ.
25 Now when He saw that He did not prevail against him, He touched the socket of his hip; and the socket of Jacob’s hip was out of joint as He wrestled with him.
25 وَرَأَى أَنَّهُ لَا يَقْدِرُ عَلَيْهِ، فَلَمَسَ حُقَّ وَرِكِهِ، فَاِنْخَلَعَ حُقُّ وَرِكِ يَعْقُوبَ فِي مُصَارَعَتِهِ لَهُ.
26 And He said, “Let Me go, for the day breaks.” But he said, “I will not let You go unless You bless me!”
26 وَقَالَ: " أَطْلِقْنِي، لِأَنَّهُ قَدْ طَلَعَ الْفَجْرُ ". فَقَالَ: " لَا أُطْلِقُكَ حَتَّى تُبَارِكَنِي ".
27 So He said to him, “What is your name?” He said, “Jacob.”
27 فَقَالَ لَهُ: " مَا اِسْمُكَ؟ " قَالَ: " يَعْقُوبُ ".
28 And He said, “Your name shall no longer be called Jacob, but Israel; for you have struggled with God and with men, and have prevailed.”
28 قَالَ: " لَا يَكُونُ اِسْمُكَ يَعْقُوبَ فِيمَا بَعْدُ، بَلْ إِسْرَائِيلَ، لِأَنَّكَ إِذْ جَاهَدْتَ عِنْدَ اللّهِ فَعَلَى النَّاسِ أَيْضًا تَسْتَظْهِرُ ".
29 Then Jacob asked, saying, “Tell me Your name, I pray.” And He said, “Why is it that you ask about My name?” And He blessed him there.
29 وَسَأَلَهُ يَعْقُوبُ وَقَالَ: " عَرِّفْنِي اسْمَكَ ". فَقَالَ: " لِمَاذَا تَسْأَلُ عَنِ اسْمِي؟ "، وَبَارَكَهُ هُنَاكَ.
30 So Jacob called the name of the place Peniel: “For I have seen God face to face, and my life is preserved.”
30 وَسَمَّى يَعْقُوبُ الْمَوْضِعَ " فَنُوئِيلَ " قَائِلًا: " إِنِّي رَأَيْتُ اللَّهَ وَجْهًا إِلَى وَجْهٍ، وَنَجَتْ نَفْسِي ".
Glory be to the Holy Trinity, our God, forever and unto the ages of all ages. Amen.
Ⲟⲩⲱ̀ⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ϯⲧ̀ⲣⲓⲁⲥ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ Ⲡⲉⲛⲛⲟⲩϯ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛⲉⲙ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲛⲓⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲧⲏⲣⲟⲩ: ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ.
مجداً للثالوث القدوس إلهنا الى أبد الآبدين كلها آمين.
	Isaiah 28:14-22
(اشعياء 28: 14-22)
A reading from Isaiah, the prophet. May his holy blessings be with us. Amen.
Ⲉⲃⲟⲗϧⲉⲛ Ⲏⲥⲁⲏ̀ⲁⲥ ⲡⲓⲡ̀ⲣⲟⲫⲏⲧⲏⲥ: ⲉ̀ⲣⲉⲡⲉϥⲥ̀ⲙⲟⲩ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ ϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲛⲉⲙⲁⲛ ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ ⲉϥϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ:
من اشعياء النبي بركته المقدسة تكون معنا. آمين.
14 Therefore hear the word of the Lord, you scornful men, Who rule this people who are in Jerusalem,
14 مِنْ أَجْلِ هَذَا اسْمَعُوا قَوْلَ الرَّبِّ أَيُّهَا الرِّجَالُ الْعُتَاةُ الْمُتَسَلِّطُونَ عَلَى هَذَا الشَّعْبِ الَّذِي فِي أُورُشَلِيمَ؛
15 Because you have said, “We have made a covenant with death, And with Sheol we are in agreement. When the overflowing scourge passes through, It will not come to us, For we have made lies our refuge, And under falsehood we have hidden ourselves.”
15 لِأَنَّكُمْ قُلْتُمْ: قَدْ قَرَّرْنَا عَهْدًا مَعَ الْهَاوِيَةِ، وَمِيثَاقًا مَعَ الْمَوْتِ. وَإِذَا مَا هَبَّتِ الرِّيحُ العَاصِفَةُ مِنْ جِهَتِنَا لَا تَعْبُرُ عَلَيْنَا؛ لِأَنَّنَا قَدْ جَعَلْنَا الْكَذِبَ رَجَاءَنَا، وَفِي الْكَذِبِ اسْتَتَرْنَا،
16 Therefore thus says the Lord God: “Behold, I lay in Zion a stone for a foundation, A tried stone, a precious cornerstone, a sure foundation; Whoever believes will not be ashamed.
16 لِأَجْلِ هَذَا هَكَذَا مَا يَقُولُهُ السَّيِّدُ الرَّبُّ: " هَأَنَذَا أَطْرَحُ حَجَرًا فِي أَسَاسَاتِ صِهْيَوْنَ، حَجَرَ زَاوِيَةٍ ثَمِينًا مُخْتَارًا كَرِيمًا فِي أَسَاسَاتِهَا فَمَنْ آمَنَ بِهِ فَلَنْ يَخْزَى.
17 Also I will cause judgment to be for hope, And my compassion shall be for just measures, and you that trust vainly in falsehood shall fall; for the storm shall not pass by you.
17 وَأَجْعَلُ لِلدَّيْنُونَةِ رَجَاءً، وَبِرَحْمَتِي يَكُونُ الْخَلَاصُ عَلَى مَوَاضِعِ السَّكَنِ، وَالْمُتَوَكِّلُونَ عَلَى الْكَذِبِ يَرْتَجُونَ الْبَاطِلَ؛ لِأَنَّهُ لَا يَجْتَازُكُمُ الْعَاصِفُ
18 Your covenant with death will be annulled, And your agreement with Sheol will not stand; When the overflowing scourge passes through, Then you will be trampled down by it.
18 لِئَلَّا يُنْزَعَ عَهْدُكُمْ مَعَ الْمَوْتِ، وَرَجَاؤُكُمْ مَعَ الْجَحِيمِ لَا يَنْتَهِي. إِذَا أَتَى عَلَيْكُمُ الْعَاصِفُ الْجَارِفُ تَكُونُونَ لَهُ مَوْطِئًا.
19 Whenever it shall pass by, it shall take you; by morning it shall pass by in the day, and in the night there shall be an evil hope.
19 إِذَا جَاءَ مِنْ جِهَتِكُمْ يَأْخُذُكُمْ، وَسَوْفَ يَعْبُرُ النَّهَارُ مُبَكِّرًا، وَيُرْتَجَى السُّوءُ لَيْلًا.
20 You that are distressed; we cannot fight, but we are ourselves too weak for you to be gathered.
20 تَعَلَّمُوا أَنْ تَسْمَعُوا أَيُّهَا الْمُتَضَايقُونَ أَنَّنَا لَا نَسْتَطِيعُ أَنْ نُحَارِبَ وَنَحْنُ ضُعَفَاءُ عَنْ أَنْ نَتَجَمَّعَ،
21 For the Lord will rise up as a mountain of ungodly me, He will be angry as in the Valley of Gibeon— That He may do His work, His awesome work, And bring to pass His act, His unusual act, and His destruction shall be strange.
21 وَسَيَقُومُ كَالْجَبَلِ لِلْمُنَافِقينَ، وَيَحُلُّ فِي وَادِي جِبْعُونَ، بِغَضَبٍ يَعْمَلُ أَعْمَالَهُ، عَمَلًا مَرِيرًا، وَيَصْنَعُ غَضَبَهُ فِي الْغُرْبَةِ، وَغَرِيبٌ هُوَ حَنَقُهُ.
22 Now therefore, do not be mockers, Lest your bonds be made strong; For I have heard from the Lord God of hosts, A destruction determined even upon the whole earth.
22 أَمَّا أَنْتُمْ فَلَا تَفْرَحُوا وَلَا تَدَعُوا قُيُودَكُمْ لَا تُقْهَرُ؛ لِأَنَّنَا قَدْ سَمِعْنَا بِأَعْمَالِ الْقَضَاءِ وَفَنَاءٍ مِنْ قِبَلِ رَبِّ الْجُنُودِ، هَذِهِ الَّتِي سَيَصْنَعُهَا عَلَى كُلِّ الْأَرْضِ ".
Glory be to the Holy Trinity, our God, forever and unto the ages of all ages. Amen.
Ⲟⲩⲱ̀ⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ϯⲧ̀ⲣⲓⲁⲥ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ Ⲡⲉⲛⲛⲟⲩϯ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛⲉⲙ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲛⲓⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲧⲏⲣⲟⲩ: ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ.
مجداً للثالوث القدوس إلهنا الى أبد الآبدين كلها آمين.
	Job 20:1-29
(ايوب 20: 1-29)
A reading from Job the righteous. May his holy blessings be with us. Amen.
Ⲉⲃⲟⲗϧⲉⲛ Ⲓⲱⲃ Ⲡⲓⲑ̀ⲙⲏⲓ: ⲉ̀ⲣⲉⲡⲉϥⲥ̀ⲙⲟⲩ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ ϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲛⲉⲙⲁⲛ ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ ⲉϥϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ:
من ايوب الصديق بركته المقدسة تكون معنا. آمين.
1 Then Zophar the Naamathite answered and said:
1 أَجَابَ صُوفَرُ النَّعْمَاتِيُّ وَقَالَ:
2 “Therefore my anxious thoughts make me answer, Because of the turmoil within me.
2 لِذَلِكَ تُلْهِمُنِي خَوَاطِرِي، وَمِنْ أَجْلِهَا مَا بِيَ مِنْ الْاِضْطِرَابِ.
3 I have heard the rebuke that reproaches me, And the spirit of my understanding causes me to answer.
3 لَقَدْ سَمِعْتُ تَوْبِيخًا يُعَيِّرُنِي. فَلَقَّنَنِي رُوْحٌ مِنْ فِطْنَتِي.
4 “Do you not know this of old, Since man was placed on earth,
4 أَعَلِمْتَ هَذَا مُنْذُ الدَّهْرِ، مُنْذُ جُعِلَ الْبَشَرُ عَلَى الْأَرْضِ،
5 That the triumphing of the wicked is short, And the joy of the hypocrite is but for a moment?
5 أَنَّ طَرَبَ الْمُنَافِقِينَ قَرِيبُ الزَّوَالِ، وَأَنَّ فَرَحَ الْكَافِرِ لَمْحَةٌ؟
6 Though his haughtiness mounts up to the heavens, And his head reaches to the clouds,
6 فَإِنَّهُ وَلَوْ بَلَغَ السَّمَاءَ ارْتِفَاعًا، وَلَطَمَتْ هَامَتُهُ السَّحَابَ.
7 Yet he will perish forever like his own refuse; Those who have seen him will say, ‘Where is he?’
7 يَهْلِكُ إِلَى الْأَبَدِ كَعَذِرَتِهِ. فَيَقُولُ الَّذِينَ يَرَوْنَهُ: أَيْنَ هُوَ؟
8 He will fly away like a dream, and not be found; Yes, he will be chased away like a vision of the night.
8 يَطِيرُ كَالْحُلْمِ فَلَا يُوجَدُ، وَيَضْمَحِلُّ كَرُؤْيَا اللَّيْلِ.
9 The eye that saw him will see him no more, Nor will his place behold him anymore.
9 وَالْعَيْنُ الَّتِي لَمَحَتْهُ لَا تَعُودُ تَلْمَحُهُ، وَلَا يَرَاهُ مَكَانُهُ مِنْ بَعْدُ.
10 His children will seek the favor of the poor, And his hands will restore his wealth.
10 بَنُوهُ يُوفُونَ الْمَسَاكِينَ حَقَّهُمْ، بَلْ كَفَّاهُ تَرُدَّانِ سَلْبَهُ.
11 His bones are full of his youthful vigor, But it will lie down with him in the dust.
11 رَذَائِلُ شَبَابِهِ تَمْلَأُ عِظَامَهُ، وَمَعَهُ تَضْطَجِعُ فِي التُّرَابِ.
12 “Though evil is sweet in his mouth, And he hides it under his tongue,
12 إِذْ حَلَا السُّوءُ بِفِيهِ، وَخَبَّأَهُ تَحْتَ لِسَانِهِ.
13 Though he spares it and does not forsake it, But still keeps it in his mouth,
13 وَادَّخَرَهُ وَلَمْ يُلْقِهِ، بَلْ أَحْرَزَهُ ضِمْنَ حَنَكِهِ.
14 Yet his food in his stomach turns sour; It becomes cobra venom within him.
14 فَإِنَّ طَعَامَهُ هَذَا يَتَحَوَّلُ فِي أَمْعَائِهِ إِلَى مَرَارَةِ صِلٍّ فِي جَوْفِهِ.
15 He swallows down riches And vomits them up again; God casts them out of his belly.
15 قَدِ اِبْتَلَعَ أَمْوَالًا إلَّا أَنَّهُ يَقِيئُهَا. اللَّهُ يَسْتَخْرِجُهَا مِنْ جَوْفِهِ.
16 He will suck the poison of cobras; The viper’s tongue will slay him.
16 رَضَعَ سُمَّ الْأَصْلَالِ. فَقَتَلَهُ لِسَانُ الْأَفْعَى.
17 He will not see the streams, The rivers flowing with honey and cream.
17 لَا يَرَى مَجَارِيَ أَنْهَارٍ وَلَا سُيُولًا مِنْ عَسَلٍ وَزُبْدٍ.
18 He will restore that for which he labored, And will not swallow it down; From the proceeds of business He will get no enjoyment.
18 يَرُدُّ كَسْبَهُ وَلَا يَلْتَهِمُهُ. بَلْ يَرُدُّ نَظِيرَ سُحْتِهِ. وَلَا يَتَمَتَّعُ.
19 For he has oppressed and forsaken the poor, He has violently seized a house which he did not build.
19 لِأَنَّهُ هَضَمَ الْمَسَاكِينَ، وَخَذَلَهُمْ، وَاِغْتَصَبَ الْبُيُوتَ وَلَمْ يَبْنِهَا.
20 “Because he knows no quietness in his heart, He will not save anything he desires.
20 وَإِذْ لَمْ يَعْرِفِ الْقَنَاعَةَ فِي جَوْفِهِ، فَإِنَّهُ لَا يَنْجُو بِمَرَامِهِ.
21 Nothing is left for him to eat; Therefore his well-being will not last.
21 لَمْ يُبْقِ نَهَمَهَ عَلَى شَيْءٍ، لِذَلِكَ نُعْمَاهُ لَا تَثْبُتُ.
22 In his self-sufficiency he will be in distress; Every hand of misery will come against him.
22 فِي إِبَّانِ السَّعَةِ يُصِيبُهُ الضَّنْكُ. وَتَقَعُ عَلَيْهِ يَدُ كُلِّ بَلِيَّةٍ.
23 When he is about to fill his stomach, God will cast on him the fury of His wrath, And will rain it on him while he is eating.
23 لِيَكُنْ لَهُ أَنْ يَمْلَأَ بَطْنَهُ، لِيَصُبَّ اللَّهُ عَلَيْهِ نَارَ غَضَبِهِ، وَلْيُمْطِرْهَا عَلَيْهِ طَعَامًا.
24 He will flee from the iron weapon; A bronze bow will pierce him through.
24 إِنْ فَرَّ مِنْ آلَةِ الْحَدِيدِ. فَلْتَخْتَرِمْهُ قَوْسُ النُّحَاسِ.
25 It is drawn, and comes out of the body; Yes, the glittering point comes out of his gall. Terrors come upon him;
25 يَنْزِعُ فِيهَا فَيَنْفُذُ النُّصْلُ مِنْ جَسَدِهِ، وَيَلْمَعُ مِنْ كَبِدِهِ وَتَخْشَاهُ الْأَهْوَالُ.
26 Total darkness is reserved for his treasures. An unfanned fire will consume him; It shall go ill with him who is left in his tent.
26 كُلُّ ظَلَامٍ مُدَّخَرٌ فِي كُنُوزِهِ. وَتَأْكُلُهُ نَارٌ لَمْ ينْفخْ فِيهَا. وَتُتْلِفُ مَا بَقِيَ فِي خِبَائِهِ.
27 The heavens will reveal his iniquity, And the earth will rise up against him.
27 تَكْشِفُ السَّمَاوَاتُ عَنْ إِثْمِهِ، وَالْأَرْضُ تَقُومُ عَلَيْهِ.
28 The increase of his house will depart, And his goods will flow away in the day of His wrath.
28 تُسْلَبُ غِلَالُ بَيْتِهِ. وَتُهَالُ فِي يَوْمِ غَضَبِ اللَّهِ.
29 This is the portion from God for a wicked man, The heritage appointed to him by God.”
29 ذَلِكَ حَظُّ الرَّجُلِ الْمُنَافِقِ مِنْ عِنْدِ اللّهِ، وَمِيرَاثُهُ بِأَمْرِ الْقَدِيرِ.
Glory be to the Holy Trinity, our God, forever and unto the ages of all ages. Amen.
Ⲟⲩⲱ̀ⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ϯⲧ̀ⲣⲓⲁⲥ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ Ⲡⲉⲛⲛⲟⲩϯ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛⲉⲙ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲛⲓⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲧⲏⲣⲟⲩ: ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ.
مجداً للثالوث القدوس إلهنا الى أبد الآبدين كلها آمين.
	Daniel 6:1-27
(دانيال 6: 1-27)
A reading from Daniel, the prophet. May his holy blessings be with us. Amen.
Ⲉⲃⲟⲗϧⲉⲛ Ⲇⲁⲛⲓⲏⲗ ⲡⲓⲡ̀ⲣⲟⲫⲏⲧⲏⲥ: ⲉ̀ⲣⲉⲡⲉϥⲥ̀ⲙⲟⲩ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ ϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲛⲉⲙⲁⲛ ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ ⲉϥϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ:
من دانيال النبي بركته المقدسة تكون معنا. آمين.
1 It pleased Darius to set over the kingdom one hundred and twenty satraps, to be over the whole kingdom;
1 وَحَسُنَ لَدَى دَارْيُوسَ أَنْ يُقِيمَ عَلَى الْمَمْلَكَةِ مِئَةً وَعِشْرِينَ قُطبًا يَكُونُونُ عَلَى الْمَمْلَكَةِ كُلِّهَا،
2 and over these, three governors, of whom Daniel was one, that the satraps might give account to them, so that the king would suffer no loss.
2 وَعَلَى هَؤُلَاءِ ثَلَاثَةَ وُزَرَاءَ. أَحَدُهُمْ دَانِيالُ، لِيُؤَدِّيَ الأَقْطَابُ إِلَيْهِمُ الْحِسَابَ، فَلَا يَلْحَقُ الْمَلِكَ ضَرَرٌ.
3 Then this Daniel distinguished himself above the governors and satraps, because an excellent spirit was in him; and the king gave thought to setting him over the whole realm.
3 فَفَاقَ دانِيَالُ الْوُزَرَاءَ وَالْأَقْطَابَ، لِأَنَّ رُوحًا بَارِعًا كَانَ فِيهِ. فَكَانَ فِي عَزْمِ الْمَلِكِ أَنْ يُقِيمَهُ عَلَى الْمَمْلَكَةِ كُلِّهَا.
4 So the governors and satraps sought to find some charge against Daniel concerning the kingdom; but they could find no charge or fault, because he was faithful; nor was there any error or fault found in him.
4 حِينَئِذٍ اِلْتَمَسَ الْوُزَرَاءُ وَالْأَقْطَابُ عِلَّةً عَلَى دَانِيَالَ فِي سِيَاسَةِ الْمَمْلَكَةِ، لَكِنْ لَمْ يَسْتَطِيعُوا أَنْ يَجِدُوا عِلَّةً وَلَا جَرِيمَةً، لِأَنَّهُ كَانَ أَمِينًا، فَلَمْ تُوجَدْ عَلَيْهِ زَلَّةٌ وَلَا جَرِيمَةٌ.
5 Then these men said, “We shall not find any charge against this Daniel unless we find it against him concerning the law of his God.”
5 فَقَالَ هَؤُلَاءِ الرِّجَالُ: إِنَّنَا لَا نَجِدُ عِلَّةً عَلَى دَانِيَالَ هَذَا، إِلَّا أَنَّنَا نَجِدَ عَلَيْهِ فِي شَرِيعَةِ إِلَهِهِ.
6 So these governors and satraps thronged before the king, and said thus to him: “King Darius, live forever!
6 حِينَئِذٍ اجْتَمَعَ هَؤُلَاءِ الْوُزَرَاءُ وَالْأَقْطَابُ عِنْدَ الْمَلِكِ وَقَالُوا لَهُ: أَيُّهَا الْمَلِكُ دَارْيُوس، حَيِيتَ إِلَى الْأَبَدِ.
7 All the governors of the kingdom, the administrators and satraps, the counselors and advisors, have consulted together to establish a royal statute and to make a firm decree, that whoever petitions any god or man for thirty days, except you, O king, shall be cast into the den of lions.
7 إِنَّ جَمِيعَ وُزَرَاءِ الْمَمْلَكَةِ وَالْوُلَاةِ وَالْأَقْطَابِ وَالْعُظَمَاءِ وَالْحُكَّامِ قَدِ ائْتَمَرُوا فِي أَنْ يُحْكَمَ حُكْمٌ مَلَكِيٌّ وَيُبْرَمَ إِيجَابٌ بِأَنَّ كُلَّ مَنْ سَأَلَ سُؤَالًا مِنْ إِلَهٍ أَوْ إِنْسَانٍ إِلَى ثَلَاثِينَ يَوْمًا إِلَّا مِنْكَ، أَيُّهَا الْمَلِكُ، يُلْقَى فِي جُبِّ الْأُسُودِ.
8 Now, O king, establish the decree and sign the writing, so that it cannot be changed, according to the law of the Medes and Persians, which does not alter.”
8 فَالْآنَ، أَيُّهَا الْمَلِكُ، أَبْرِزِ الْإِيَجَابَ وَارْسُمِ الْكِتَابَةَ، بِحَيْثُ لَا يَقَعُ تَغْيِيرٌ، كَمَا هِيَ شَرِيعَةُ مَادِيِ وَفَارِسَ الَّتِي لَا تُنْسَخُ.
9 Therefore King Darius signed the written decree.
9 فَرَسَمَ الْمَلِكُ دَارْيُوسُ الْكِتَابَةَ وَالْإِيجَابَ.
10 Now when Daniel knew that the writing was signed, he went home. And in his upper room, with his windows open toward Jerusalem, he knelt down on his knees three times that day, and prayed and gave thanks before his God, as was his custom since early days.
10 فَلَمَّا عَلِمَ دَانِيَالُ بِرَسْمِ الْكِتَابَةِ، انْطَلَقَ إِلَى بَيْتِهِ، وَكَانَتْ كُوَاهُ مَفْتُوحَةً فِي غُرْفَتِهِ جِهَةَ أُورُشَلِيمَ. فَكَانَ يَجْثُو عَلَى رُكْبَتَيْهِ ثَلَاثَ مَرَّاتٍ فِي الْيَوْمِ، وَيُصَلِّي وَيَعْتَرِفُ لِلَّهِ، كَمَا كَانَ يَفْعَلُ مِنْ قَبْلُ.
11 Then these men assembled and found Daniel praying and making supplication before his God.
11 فَاجْتَمَعَ أُولَئِكَ الرِّجَالُ فَوَجَدُوا دَانِيَالَ يَسْأَلُ وَيَتَضَرَّعُ أَمَامَ إِلَهِهِ.
12 And they went before the king, and spoke concerning the king’s decree: “Have you not signed a decree that every man who petitions any god or man within thirty days, except you, O king, shall be cast into the den of lions?” The king answered and said, “The thing is true, according to the law of the Medes and Persians, which does not alter.”
12 حِينَئِذٍ اقْتَرَبُوا إِلَى الْمَلِكِ وَتَكَلَّمُوا فِي إِيجَابِ الْمَلِكِ قَائِلِينَ: أَلَمْ تَرْسُمْ إِيجَابًا بِأَنَّ كُلَّ مَنْ سَأَلَ شَيْئًا مِنْ إِلَهٍ أَوْ إِنْسَانٍ إِلَى ثَلَاثِينَ يَوْمًا إِلَّا مِنْكَ، أَيُّهَا الْمَلِكُ، يُلْقَى فِي جُبِّ الْأُسُودِ؟ فَأَجَابَ الْمَلِكُ وَقَالَ: الْأَمْرُ حَقٌّ، كَمَا هِيَ شَرِيعَةُ مَادِيِ وَفَارِسُ الَّتِي لَا تُنْسَخُ.
13 So they answered and said before the king, “That Daniel, who is one of the captives from Judah, does not show due regard for you, O king, or for the decree that you have signed, but makes his petition three times a day.”
13 فَأَجَابُوا وَقَالُوا أَمَامَ الْمَلِكِ: إِنَّ دَانِيَالَ الَّذِي مِنْ بَنِي جَلَاءِ يَهُوذَا لَمْ يَعْبَأْ بِكَ، أَيُّهَا الْمَلِكُ، وَلَا بِالْإِيَجَابِ الَّذِي رَسَمْتَهُ، بَلْ ثَلَاثَ مَرَّاتٍ فِي الْيَوْمِ يَسْأَلُ سُؤَالَهُ.
14 And the king, when he heard these words, was greatly displeased with himself, and set his heart on Daniel to deliver him; and he labored till the going down of the sun to deliver him.
14 فَلَمَّا سَمِعَ الْمَلِكُ هَذَا الْكَلَامَ، اِغْتَمَّ جِدًّا، وَجَعَلَ اهْتِمَامَهُ أَنْ يُنْقِذَ دَانِيَالَ، وَاجْتَهَدَ فِي تَخْلِيصِهِ إِلَى غُرُوبِ الشَّمْسِ.
15 Then these men approached the king, and said to the king, “Know, O king, that it is the law of the Medes and Persians that no decree or statute which the king establishes may be changed.”
15 حِينَئِذٍ اِجْتَمَعَ أُولَئِكَ الرِّجَالُ لَدَى الْمَلِكِ وَقَالُوا لِلْمَلِكِ: اِعْلَمْ، أَيُّهَا الْمَلِكُ، أَنَّ شَرِيعَةَ مَادِي وَفَارِسَ هِيَ أَنَّ كُلَّ إِيجَابٍ وَحُكْمٍ يَحْكُمُهُ الْمَلِكُ لَا يُغَيَّرُ.
16 So the king gave the command, and they brought Daniel and cast him into the den of lions. But the king spoke, saying to Daniel, “Your God, whom you serve continually, He will deliver you.”
16 حِينَئِذٍ أَمَرَ الْمَلِكُ فَأُتِيَ بِدَانِيَالَ، وَأُلْقِيَ فِي جُبِّ الْأُسُودِ. فَأَجَابَ الْمَلِكُ وَقَالَ لِدَانِيَالَ: إِنَّ إِلَهَكَ الَّذِي أَنْتَ مُوَاظِبٌ عَلَى عِبَادَتِهِ هُوَ يُنْقِذُكَ.
17 Then a stone was brought and laid on the mouth of the den, and the king sealed it with his own signet ring and with the signets of his lords, that the purpose concerning Daniel might not be changed.
17 وَأُتِيَ بِحَجَرٍ فَوُضِعَ عَلَى فَمِ الْجُبِّ، وَخَتَمَهُ الْمَلِكُ بِخَاتَمِهِ وَخَاتَمِ عُظَمَائِهِ، لِئَلَّا يَتَغَيَّرَ الْقَصْدُ فِي دَانِيَالَ.
18 Now the king went to his palace and spent the night fasting; and no musicians were brought before him. Also his sleep went from him.
18 ثُمَّ مَضَى الْمَلِكُ إِلَى قَصْرِهِ وَبَاتَ صَائِمًا، وَلَمْ تَدْخُلْ عَلَيْهِ سَرَارِيَّهُ، وَنَفَرَ النَّوْمُ عَنْهُ.
19 Then the king arose very early in the morning and went in haste to the den of lions.
19 وَفِي الْغَدَاةِ قَامَ الْمَلِكُ عِنْدَ الْفَجْرِ وَبادَرَ فَاِنْطَلَقَ إِلَى جُبِّ الْأُسُودِ.
20 And when he came to the den, he cried out with a lamenting voice to Daniel. The king spoke, saying to Daniel, “Daniel, servant of the living God, has your God, whom you serve continually, been able to deliver you from the lions?”
20 وَلَمَّا اقْتَرَبَ الْمَلِكُ مِنَ الْجُبِّ، نَادَى دَانِيَالَ بِصَوْتٍ حَزِينٍ وَخَاطَبَهُ قَائِلًا: يَا دَانِيَالُ، عَبْدَ اللَّهِ الْحَيِّ، لَعَلَّ إِلَهَكَ الَّذِي أَنْتَ مُوَاظِبٌ عَلَى عِبَادَتِهِ اسْتَطَاعَ أَنْ يُنْقِذَكَ مِنَ الْأُسُودِ؟
21 Then Daniel said to the king, “O king, live forever!
21 فَأَجَابَ دَانِيَالُ الْمَلِكَ: أَيُّهَا الْمَلِكُ، حَيِيتَ إِلَى الْأَبَدِ.
22 My God sent His angel and shut the lions’ mouths, so that they have not hurt me, because I was found innocent before Him; and also, O king, I have done no wrong before you.”
22 إِنَّ إِلَهِي أَرْسَلَ مَلَاكَهُ فَسَدَّ أَفْوَاهَ الْأُسُودِ، فَلَمْ تُؤْذِنِي، لِأَنِّي وُجِدْتُ زَكِيًّا أَمَامَهُ، وَأَمَامَكِ أَيْضًا، أَيُّهَا الْمَلِكُ، لَمْ أَصْنَعْ سُوءًا.
23 Now the king was exceedingly glad for him, and commanded that they should take Daniel up out of the den. So Daniel was taken up out of the den, and no injury whatever was found on him, because he believed in his God.
23 فَفَرِحَ الْمَلِكُ بِهِ فَرَحًا عَظِيمًا، وَأَمَرَ أَنْ يُخْرَجَ دَانِيَالُ مِنَ الْجُبِّ. فَأُخْرِجَ دَانِيالُ مِنَ الْجُبِّ، فَلَمْ يُوجَدْ فِيهِ أَذًى لِأَنَّهُ آمَنَ بِإِلَهِهِ.
24 And the king gave the command, and they brought those men who had accused Daniel, and they cast them into the den of lions—them, their children, and their wives; and the lions overpowered them, and broke all their bones in pieces before they ever came to the bottom of the den.
24 ثُمَّ أَمَرَ الْمَلِكُ، فَأُتِيَ بِأُولَئِكَ الرِّجَالِ الَّذِينَ وَشَوْا بِدَانِيَالَ، وَأُلْقُوا فِي جُبِّ الْأُسُودِ، هُمْ وَبَنُوهُمْ وَنِسَاؤُهُمْ، فَلَمْ يَبْلُغُوا إِلَى أَرْضِ الْجُبِّ حَتَّى بَطَشَتْ بِهِمُ الْأُسُودُ وَسَحَقَتْ جَمِيعَ عِظَامِهِمْ.
25 Then King Darius wrote: To all peoples, nations, and languages that dwell in all the earth: Peace be multiplied to you.
25 ثُمَّ كَتَبَ دَارْيُوسُ الْمَلِكُ وَقَالَ: إِلَى جَمِيعِ الشُّعُوبِ وَالْأُمَمِ وَالْأَلْسِنَةِ السَّاكِنِينَ فِي الْأَرْضِ كُلِّهَا: لِيَكْثُرْ سَلَامُكُمْ.
26 I make a decree that in every dominion of my kingdom men must tremble and fear before the God of Daniel. For He is the living God, And steadfast forever; His kingdom is the one which shall not be destroyed, And His dominion shall endure to the end.
26 لِقَدْ صَدَرَ أَمْرٌ مِنْ قِبَلِي لِلنَّاسِ فِي كُلِّ وِلَايَةِ مَمْلَكَتِي أَنْ يَهَابُوا وَيَرْهَبُوا وَجْهَ إِلَهِ دَانِيَالَ. لِأَنَّهُ هُوَ الْإِلَهُ الْحَيُّ الْقَيُّومُ إِلَى الْأَبَدِ. وَمُلْكُهُ لَا يَنْقَرِضُ وَسُلْطَانُهُ إِلَى الْمُنْتَهَى.
27 He delivers and rescues, And He works signs and wonders In heaven and on earth, Who has delivered Daniel from the power of the lions.
27 الْمُنْقِذُ الْمُنَجِّي. الصَّانِعُ الْآيَاتِ وَالْعَجَائِبَ فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ. وَهُوَ الَّذِي أَنَقْذَ دَانِيَالَ مِنْ أَيَدِي الْأُسُودِ.
Glory be to the Holy Trinity, our God, forever and unto the ages of all ages. Amen.
Ⲟⲩⲱ̀ⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ϯⲧ̀ⲣⲓⲁⲥ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ Ⲡⲉⲛⲛⲟⲩϯ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛⲉⲙ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲛⲓⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲧⲏⲣⲟⲩ: ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ.
مجداً للثالوث القدوس إلهنا الى أبد الآبدين كلها آمين.