Prophecies
النبوآت
	Genesis 49:1-28
(تكوين 49: 1-28)
A reading from the Book of Genesis of Moses the prophet. May his holy blessings be with us. Amen.
Ⲉⲃⲟⲗϧⲉⲛ Ⲡϫⲟⲙ ⲛ̀Ϯⲅⲉⲛⲉⲥⲓⲥ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ Ⲙⲱⲩ̀ⲥⲏⲥ ⲡⲓⲡ̀ⲣⲟⲫⲏⲧⲏⲥ: ⲉ̀ⲣⲉⲡⲉϥⲥ̀ⲙⲟⲩ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ ϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲛⲉⲙⲁⲛ ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ ⲉϥϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ:
من سفر تكوين لموسى النبي بركته المقدسة تكون معنا. آمين.
1 And Jacob called his sons and said, “Gather together, that I may tell you what shall befall you in the last days:
1 ثُمَّ دَعَا يَعْقُوبُ بَنِيهِ وَقَالَ: " اِجْتَمِعُوا لِأُنْبِئَكُمْ بِمَا يَكُونُ لَكُمْ فِي آخِرِ الْأَيَّامِ.
2 “Gather together and hear, you sons of Jacob, And listen to Israel your father.
2 اِجْتَمِعُوا وَاصْغُوا يَا بَنِي يَعْقُوبَ، وَاسْمَعُوا لِإِسْرَائِيلَ أَبِيكُمْ:
3 “Reuben, you are my firstborn, My might and the beginning of my strength, The excellency of dignity and the excellency of power.
3 رَأُوبَيْنُ، أَنْتَ بِكْرِي، قُوَّتِي وَأَوَّلُ قُدْرَتِي. فَاضِلٌ فِي الشَّرَفِ، فَاضِلٌ فِي الْعِزِّ.
4 Unstable as water, you shall not excel, Because you went up to your father’s bed; Then you defiled it— He went up to my couch.
4 فُرْتَ كَالْمَاءِ لَا تَتَفَضَّلُ، لِأَنَّكَ صَعِدْتَ عَلَى مَضْجَعِ أَبِيكَ. حِينَئِذٍ دَنَّسْتَهُ. عَلَى فِرَاشِيِ صَعِدَ.
5 “Simeon and Levi are brothers; Instruments of cruelty are in their dwelling place.
5 شِمْعُونُ وَلَاوِي أَخَوَانِ. سُيُوفُهُمَا آلَاتُ جَوْرٍ.
6 Let not my soul enter their council; Let not my honor be united to their assembly; For in their anger they slew a man, And in their self-will they hamstrung an ox.
6 مَجْلِسُهُمَا لَا تَدْخُلُهُ نَفْسِي. وَفِي مَجْمَعِهِمَا لَا تَتَّحِدُ كَرَامَتِي. لِأَنَّهُمَا فِي غَضَبِهِمَا قَتَلَا إِنْسَانًا، وَفِي رِضَاهُمَا عَرْقَبَا ثَوْرًا.
7 Cursed be their anger, for it is fierce; And their wrath, for it is cruel! I will divide them in Jacob And scatter them in Israel.
7 مَلْعُونٌ غَضَبُهُمَا فَإِنَّهُ شَدِيدٌ، وَسُخْطُهُمَا فَإِنَّهُ قَاسٍ. أُقَسِّمُهُمَا فِي يَعْقُوبَ، وَأُبَدِّدُهُمَا فِي إِسْرَائِيلَ.
8 “Judah, you are he whom your brothers shall praise; Your hand shall be on the neck of your enemies; Your father’s children shall bow down before you.
8 يَهُوذَا، إِيَّاكَ يَحْمَدُ إِخْوَتُكَ، يَدَاكَ عَلَى قَفَا أَعْدَائِكَ، يَسْجُدُ لَكَ بَنُو أَبِيكَ.
9 Judah is a lion’s whelp; From the prey, my son, you have gone up. He bows down, he lies down as a lion; And as a lion, who shall rouse him?
9 يَهُوذَا شِبْلُ أَسَدٍ، مِنْ فَرِيسَةٍ صَعِدْتَ يَا بُنَيَّ، جَثَا وَرَبَضَ كَأَسَدٍ وَكَلَبْؤَةٍ. فَمَنْ ذَا يُقِيمُهُ؟
10 The scepter shall not depart from Judah, Nor a lawgiver from between his feet, Until Shiloh comes; And to Him shall be the obedience of the people.
10 لَا يَزُولُ قَضِيبٌ مِنْ يَهُوذَا وَلَا مُشْتَرِعٌ مِنْ صُلْبِهِ حَتَّى يَأْتِيَ شِيلُوهُ وَتُطِيعُهُ الشُّعُوبُ.
11 Binding his donkey to the vine, And his donkey’s colt to the choice vine, He washed his garments in wine, And his clothes in the blood of grapes.
11 رَابِطًا بِالْجَفْنَةِ جَحْشَهُ، وَبِأَفْضَلِ كَرْمَةٍ ابْنِ أَتَانِهِ، غَسَلَ بِالْخَمْرِ لِبَاسَهُ، وَبِدَمِ الْعِنَبِ رِدَاءَهُ.
12 His eyes are darker than wine, And his teeth whiter than milk.
12 عَيْنَاهُ أَشَدُّ سَوَادًا مِنَ الْخَمْرِ، وَأَسْنَانُهُ أَشَدُّ بَيَاضًا مِنَ اللَّبَنِ.
13 “Zebulun shall dwell by the haven of the sea; He shall become a haven for ships, And his border shall adjoin Sidon.
13 زَبُولُونُ، عِنْدَ سَوَاحِلِ الْبَحْرِ يَسْكُنُ، وَعِنْدَ مَرْفَإِ السُّفُنِ. وَطَرَفُ تُخُمِهِ إِلَى صَيْدُونَ.
14 “Issachar is a strong donkey, Lying down between two burdens;
14 يَسَّاكَرُ، حِمَارٌ ضَخْمٌ رَابِضٌ بَيْنَ الْحَظَائِرِ.
15 He saw that rest was good, And that the land was pleasant; He bowed his shoulder to bear a burden, And became a band of slaves.
15 وَقَدْ رَأَى الرَّاحَةَ مَا أَجْوَدَهَا، وَالْأَرْضَ مَا أَنْزَهَهَا، فَأَحْنَى كَتِفَهُ لِلْحَمْلِ وَصَارَ لِلْمِهْنَةِ عَبْدًا.
16 “Dan shall judge his people As one of the tribes of Israel.
16 دَانُ، يَدِينُ شَعْبَهُ كَأَحَدِ أَسْبَاطِ إِسْرَائِيلَ.
17 Dan shall be a serpent by the way, A viper by the path, That bites the horse’s heels So that its rider shall fall backward.
17 يَكُونُ دَانُ ثُعْبَانًا عَلَى الطَّرِيقِ، وَأُفْعُوَانًا عَلَى السَّبِيلِ، يَلْسَعُ عَقِبَي الْفَرَسِ فَيَسْقُطُ رَاكِبُهُ إِلَى الْوَرَاءِ.
18 I have waited for your salvation, O Lord!
18 لِخَلَاصِكَ اِنْتَظَرْتُ يَا رَبُّ.
19 “Gad, a troop shall tramp upon him, But he shall triumph at last.
19 جَادُ، يَقْحَمُهُ الْغُزَاةُ، وَهُوَ يَقْتَحِمُ سَاقَتَهُمْ.
20 “Bread from Asher shall be rich, And he shall yield royal dainties.
20 أَشِيرُ، طَعَامُهُ دَسِمٌ، وَهُوَ يُعْطِي مَلَذَّاتِ الْمُلُوكِ.
21 “Naphtali is a deer let loose; He uses beautiful words.
21 نَفْتَالِي، أَيِّلَةٌ سَائِمَةٌ، يُعْطِي أَقْوَالًا حَسَنَةً.
22 “Joseph is a fruitful bough, A fruitful bough by a well; His branches run over the wall.
22 يُوسُفُ، غُصْنُ شَجَرَةٍ مُثْمِرَةٍ، غُصْنُ شَجَرَةٍ مُثْمِرَةٍ عَلَى عَيْنٍ. لَهُ فُرُوعٌ قَدِ اِمْتَدَّتْ عَلَى سُورٍ.
23 The archers have bitterly grieved him, Shot at him and hated him.
23 فَمَرَّرَتْهُ أَصْحَابُ السِّهَامِ وَرَمَتْهُ وَاضْطَهَدَتْهُ.
24 But his bow remained in strength, And the arms of his hands were made strong By the hands of the Mighty God of Jacob (From there is the Shepherd, the Stone of Israel),
24 وَلَكِنْ ثَبَتَتْ بِمَتَانَةٍ قَوْسُهُ، وَتَشَدَّدَتْ سَوَاعِدُ يَدَيْهِ. مِنْ يَدَي عَزِيزِ يَعْقُوبَ، مِنْ هُنَاكَ، مِنَ الرَّاعِي صَخْرِ إِسْرَائِيلَ.
25 By the God of your father who will help you, And by the Almighty who will bless you With blessings of heaven above, Blessings of the deep that lies beneath, Blessings of the breasts and of the womb.
25 مِنْ إِلَهِ أَبِيكَ الَّذِي يُعِينُكَ، وَمِنَ الْقَادِرِ عَلَى كُلِّ شَيْءٍ الَّذِي يُبَارِكُكَ، تَأْتِي بَرَكَاتُ السَّمَاءِ مِنَ الْعُلُوِّ، وَبَرَكَاتُ الْغَمْرِ الرَّاكِضِ أَسْفَلُ. بَرَكَاتُ الثَّدْيَيْنِ وَالرَّحِمِ.
26 The blessings of your father Have excelled the blessings of my ancestors, Up to the utmost bound of the everlasting hills. They shall be on the head of Joseph, And on the crown of the head of him who was separate from his brothers.
26 بَرَكَاتُ أَبِيكَ تُضَافُ إِلَى بَرَكَاتِ آبَائِي. إِلَى مُنْيَةِ الْآكَامِ الدَّهْرِيَّةِ لِتَكُنْ عَلَى رَأْسِ يُوسُفَ، وَعَلَى قِمَّةِ نَذِيرِ إِخْوَتِهِ.
27 “Benjamin is a ravenous wolf; In the morning he shall devour the prey, And at night he shall divide the spoil.”
27 بَنْيَامِينُ، ذِئْبٌ يَفْتَرِسُ. فِي الصَّبَاحِ يَأْكُلُ غَنِيمَةً، وَعِنْدَ الْمَسَاءَ يُقَسِّمُ السَّلْبَ ".
28 All these are the twelve tribes of Israel, and this is what their father spoke to them. And he blessed them; he blessed each one according to his own blessing.
28 هَؤُلَاءِ كُلُّهُمْ هُمْ أَسْبَاطُ إِسْرَائِيلَ الاِثْنَا عَشَرَ، وَهَذَا مَا كَلَّمَهُمْ بِهِ أَبُوهُمْ وَبَارَكَهُمْ. كُلُّ وَاحِدٍ بِحَسَبِ بَرَكَتِهِ بَارَكَهُمْ.
Glory be to the Holy Trinity, our God, forever and unto the ages of all ages. Amen.
Ⲟⲩⲱ̀ⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ϯⲧ̀ⲣⲓⲁⲥ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ Ⲡⲉⲛⲛⲟⲩϯ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛⲉⲙ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲛⲓⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲧⲏⲣⲟⲩ: ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ.
مجداً للثالوث القدوس إلهنا الى أبد الآبدين كلها آمين.
	Isaiah 40:9-31
(اشعياء 40: 9-31)
A reading from Isaiah, the prophet. May his holy blessings be with us. Amen.
Ⲉⲃⲟⲗϧⲉⲛ Ⲏⲥⲁⲏ̀ⲁⲥ ⲡⲓⲡ̀ⲣⲟⲫⲏⲧⲏⲥ: ⲉ̀ⲣⲉⲡⲉϥⲥ̀ⲙⲟⲩ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ ϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲛⲉⲙⲁⲛ ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ ⲉϥϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ:
من اشعياء النبي بركته المقدسة تكون معنا. آمين.
9 O Zion, You who bring good tidings, Get up into the high mountain; O Jerusalem, You who bring good tidings, Lift up your voice with strength, Lift it up, be not afraid; Say to the cities of Judah, “Behold your God!”
9 اِصْعَدْ عَلَى جَبَلٍ عَالٍ، يَا مُبَشِّرَ صِهْيَوْنَ. اِرْفَعَ صَوْتَكَ بِقُوَّةٍ، يَا مُبَشِّرَ أُورُشَلِيمَ. اِرْفَعْ صَوْتَكَ بِقُوَّةٍ وَلَا تَخَفْ. قُلْ لِمُدُنِ يَهُوذَا:
10 Behold, the Lord God shall come with a strong hand, And His arm shall rule for Him; Behold, His reward is with Him, And His work before Him.
10 " هُوَذَا رَبُّكُمْ آتٍ بِقُوَّةٍ وَذِرَاعُهُ بِرُبُوبِيَّةٍ. هُوَذَا أُجْرَتُهُ مَعَهُ وَعَمَلُهُ قُدَّامَهُ.
11 He will feed His flock like a shepherd; He will gather the lambs with His arm, And carry them in His bosom, And gently lead those who are with young.
11 كَرَاعٍ يَرْعَى قَطِيعَ غَنَمِهِ. وَبِذِرَاعِهِ يَجْمَعُ الْحُمْلَانَ، وَيُعَزِّي الْحَبَالَى ".
12 Who has measured the waters in the hollow of His hand, Measured heaven with a span And calculated the dust of the earth in a measure? Weighed the mountains in scales And the hills in a balance?
12 مَنْ كَالَ الْمَاءَ بِيَدِهِ، وَقَاسَ السَّمَاءَ بِشِبْرِهِ، وَالْأَرْضَ كُلَّهَا بِقَبْضَتِهِ، مَنْ وَزَنَ الْجِبَالَ بالْمِثْقَالِ، وَالْآكَامَ بِالْمِيزَانِ؟
13 Who has directed the Spirit of the Lord, Or as His counselor has taught Him?
13 مَنْ عَلِمَ قَلْبَ الرَّبِّ، أَوْ مَنْ كانَ مَعَهُ مُشِيرًا فَعَلَّمَهُ؟
14 With whom did He take counsel, and who instructed Him, And taught Him in the path of justice? Who taught Him knowledge, And showed Him the way of understanding?
14 أَوْ مَنِ الَّذِي أَرَاهُ الْحُكْمَ، أَوْ طَرِيقَ الْفَهْمِ مَنْ عَرَّفَهَا لَهُ؟ أَوْ مَنْ سَبَقَ فَأَعْطَاهُ حَتَّى عَوَّضَهُ؟
15 Behold, the nations are as a drop in a bucket, And are counted as the small dust on the scales; Look, He lifts up the isles as a very little thing.
15 إِنَّمَا الْأُمَمُ كُلُّهَا عِنْدَهُ مِثْلُ نُقْطَةِ ماءٍ تَنْقُطُ مِنْ قَادُوسٍ، وَمِثْلُ مَيَلَانِ الْمِيزَانِ حُسِبُوا. وَجَمِيعُهُمْ كَالْبُصَاقِ يُعَدُّونَ.
16 And Lebanon is not sufficient to burn, Nor its beasts sufficient for a burnt offering.
16 وَخَشَبُ لُبْنَانَ لَا يَكْفِي لِلْحَرِيقِ، وَجَمِيعُ الْبَهَائِمِ لَا تَكْفِي لِلْمُحْرَقَةِ.
17 All nations before Him are as nothing, And they are counted by Him less than nothing and worthless.
17 جَمِيعُ الْأُمَمِ لَدَيْهِ كَلَا شَيْءٍ. وَعِنْدَهُ كَالْعَدَمِ حُسِبُوا.
18 To whom then will you liken God? Or what likeness will you compare to Him?
18 فَبِمَنْ شَبَّهْتُمُ الرَّبَّ، وَبِأَيِّ مَثَلَ مَثَّلْتُمُوهُ؟
19 The workman molds an image, The goldsmith overspreads it with gold, And the silversmith casts silver chains.
19 هَلْ بِتِمْثَالٍ صَنَعَهُ النَّجَّارُ، وَصَفَّحَهُ الصَائِغُ بِالذَّهَبِ وَرَكَّبَ فِيهِ الذَّهَبَ وَشَبَهُهُ يَتْلَفُ؟
20 Whoever is too impoverished for such a contribution Chooses a tree that will not rot; He seeks for himself a skillful workman To prepare a carved image that will not totter.
20 إِنَّمَا خَشَبَةٌ لَا تُسَوِّسُ اخْتَارَهَا النَّجَّارُ، وَبِحِكْمَةٍ يَطْلُبُ كَيْفَ يُقِيمُ تِمْثَالًا لَا يَتَحَرَّكُ!
21 Have you not known? Have you not heard? Has it not been told you from the beginning? Have you not understood from the foundations of the earth?
21 أَلَا تَعْلَمُونَ؟ أَلَا تَسْمَعُونَ؟ أَلَمْ تُخْبَرُوا مُنْذُ الْبَدْءِ؟ أَمَا فَهِمْتُمْ أُسُسَ الْأَرْضِ؟
22 It is He who sits above the circle of the earth, And its inhabitants are like grasshoppers, Who stretches out the heavens like a curtain, And spreads them out like a tent to dwell in.
22 الْقَابِضُ عَلَى كُلِّ مُحِيطِ الْأَرْضِ وَالسُكَّانُ فِيهَا كَالْجَرَادِ. الَّذِي رَفَعَ السَّمَاءَ كَالْقُبَّةِ، وَبَسَطَهَا كَالْخَيْمَةِ لِيُسْكَنَ فِيهَا.
23 He brings the princes to nothing; He makes the judges of the earth useless.
23 الَّذِي يَجْعَلُ الرُّؤَسَاءَ كَلَا شَيْءٍ، وَالْأَرْضَ الَّتِي خَلَقَهَا كَخَوَاءٍ؛
24 Scarcely shall they be planted, Scarcely shall they be sown, Scarcely shall their stock take root in the earth, When He will also blow on them, And they will wither, And the whirlwind will take them away like stubble.
24 لِأَنَّهُمْ لَا يُزْرَعُونَ وَلَا يُغْرَسُونَ وَلَا يَكُونُ أَصْلُهُمْ عَلَى الْأَرْضِ؛ لِأَنَّه نَفَخَ عَلَيْهُمْ فَيَبِسُوا، وَحَمَلَهُمُ الْعَاصِفُ كَالْقَشِّ.
25 “To whom then will you liken Me, Or to whom shall I be equal?” says the Holy One.
25 وَالْآنَ بِمَنْ تُشَبِّهُونَنِي فَأَتَعَالَى؟ يَقُوُلُ الْقُدُّوسُ.
26 Lift up your eyes on high, And see who has created these things, Who brings out their host by number; He calls them all by name, By the greatness of His might And the strength of His power; Not one is missing.
26 اِرْفَعُوا عُيُونَكُمْ إِلَى الْعَلَاءِ وَانْظُرُوُا، مَنْ خَلَقَ هَذِهِ كُلَّهَا؟ الَّذِي يُخْرِجُ زِينَتَهَا عَدَدًا، يَدْعُوهَا مِنْ مِيَاهٍ كَثِيرَةٍ؟ وَمِنْ عِزَّةِ قُوَّتِهِ لَا يَنْسَى شَيْئًا مِنْهَا.
27 Why do you say, O Jacob, And speak, O Israel: “My way is hidden from the Lord, And my just claim is passed over by my God”?
27 فَلِمَاذَا تَقُولُ يَا يَعْقُوبُ، وَلِمَاذَا تَتَكَلَّمُ يَا إِسْرَائِيلُ: " إِنَّ طَرِيقِي خَفِيَتْ عَنِ اللَّهِ وَإِنَّ اللَّهَ قَدْ نَزَعَ قَضَائِي فَمَضَى ".
28 Have you not known? Have you not heard? The everlasting God, the Lord, The Creator of the ends of the earth, Neither faints nor is weary. His understanding is unsearchable.
28 أَمَا عَلِمْتَ وَسَمِعْتَ أَنَّ اللَّهَ أبَدِيٌّ؟! اللَّهُ الَّذِي خَلَقَ أَقْطَارَ الأَرْضِ لَا يَتَحَرَّكُ وَلَا يَتْعَبُ وَلَا حَدَّ لِعِلْمِهِ.
29 He gives power to the weak, And to those who have no might He increases strength.
29 الَّذِي يَهَبُ الْمُعْيِيَ قُوَّةً، وَالْمُعْطِي وَجَعَ الْقَلْبِ لِلَّذِينَ لَا تَحْتَرِقُ قُلُوبُهُمْ.
30 Even the youths shall faint and be weary, And the young men shall utterly fall,
30 جَاعَتِ الْغِلْمَانُ، وَتَعِبَ الشُبَّانُ، وَالمُخْتَارُونَ يَصِيرُونَ غَيْرَ أَقْوَيَاءٍ،
31 But those who wait on the Lord Shall renew their strength; They shall mount up with wings like eagles, They shall run and not be weary, They shall walk and not faint.
31 وَالَّذِينَ يَنْتَظِرُونَ اللَّهَ يَتَبَدَّلُونَ فَتَتَجَدَّدُ قُوَّتُهُمْ وَتَنْبُتُ لَهُمْ أَجْنِحَةٌ كَالنُّسُورِ. يُسْرِعُونَ وَلَا يَتْعَبُونَ. يَمْشُونَ وَلَا يُعْيُونَ.
Glory be to the Holy Trinity, our God, forever and unto the ages of all ages. Amen.
Ⲟⲩⲱ̀ⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ϯⲧ̀ⲣⲓⲁⲥ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ Ⲡⲉⲛⲛⲟⲩϯ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛⲉⲙ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲛⲓⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲧⲏⲣⲟⲩ: ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ.
مجداً للثالوث القدوس إلهنا الى أبد الآبدين كلها آمين.
	Zephaniah 3:14-20
(صفنيا 3: 14-20)
A reading from Zephaniah, the prophet. May his holy blessings be with us. Amen.
Ⲉⲃⲟⲗϧⲉⲛ Ⲥⲟⲫⲟⲛⲓⲁⲥ ⲡⲓⲡ̀ⲣⲟⲫⲏⲧⲏⲥ: ⲉ̀ⲣⲉⲡⲉϥⲥ̀ⲙⲟⲩ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ ϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲛⲉⲙⲁⲛ ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ ⲉϥϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ:
من صفنيا النبي بركته المقدسة تكون معنا. آمين.
14 Sing, O daughter of Zion! Shout, O Israel! Be glad and rejoice with all your heart, O daughter of Jerusalem!
14 تَرَنَّمِي يَا ابْنَةَ صِهْيَوْنَ! اِهْتِفْ يَا إِسْرَائِيلُ! اِفْرَحِي وَتَهَلَّلِي بِكُلِّ قَلْبِكِ يَا اِبْنَةَ أُورُشَلِيمَ!
15 The Lord has taken away your judgments, He has cast out your enemy. The King of Israel, the Lord, is in your midst; You shall see disaster no more.
15 فَقَدْ نَزَعَ الرَّبُّ قَضَاكِ، وَأَقْصَى عَدُوَّكِ. فِي وَسَطِكِ مَلِكُ إِسْرَائِيلَ الرَّبُّ. فَلَا تَرَيْنَ شَرًّا مِنْ بَعْدُ.
16 In that day it shall be said to Jerusalem: “Do not fear; Zion, let not your hands be weak.
16 فِي ذَلِكَ الْيَوْمِ يُقَالُ لِأُورُشَلِيمَ: " لَا تَخَافِي يَا صِهْيَوْنُ. لَا تَسْتَرْخِ يَدَاكِ.
17 The Lord your God in your midst, The Mighty One, will save; He will rejoice over you with gladness, He will quiet you with His love, He will rejoice over you with singing.”
17 إِنَّ فِي وَسَطِكِ الرَّبَّ إِلَهَكِ الْجَبَّارَ. فَهُوَ يُخَلِّصُ. وَيُسَرُّ بِكِ فَرَحًا. وَهُوَ يَسْكُنُ فِي مَحَبَّتِهِ. وَيَبْتَهِجُ بِكِ بِتَرَانِيمَ.
18 “I will gather those who sorrow over the appointed assembly, Who are among you, To whom its reproach is a burden.
18 لَقَدْ حَشَدْتُ الْمَحْزُونِينَ بِالنَّفْيِ عَنِ الْجَمَاعَةِ. الَّذِينَ هُمْ مِنْكِ. وَلِأَجْلِهِمْ قَدْ حَمَلْتِ الْعَارَ.
19 Behold, at that time I will deal with all who afflict you; I will save the lame, And gather those who were driven out; I will appoint them for praise and fame In every land where they were put to shame.
19 هَأَنَذَا أُبِيدُ جَمِيعَ مُذَلِّلِيكِ فِي ذَلِكَ الزَّمَانِ، وَأُخَلِّصُ الْمُنْحَنِيَةَ، وَأَجْمَعُ الْمَطْرُودَةَ، وَأَجْعَلُهُمْ حَمْدًا وَاسْمًا فِي أَرْضِ خِزْيِهِمْ كُلِّهَا.
20 At that time I will bring you back, Even at the time I gather you; For I will give you fame and praise Among all the peoples of the earth, When I return your captives before your eyes,” Says the Lord.
20 فِي ذَلِكَ الزَّمَانِ آتِي بِكُمْ فِي الزَّمَانِ الَّذِي أَحْشُدُكُمْ فِيهِ. لِأَنِّي سَأَجْعَلُكُمُ اسْمًا وَحَمْدًا فِي جَمِيعِ شُعُوبِ الْأَرْضِ، عِنْدَمَا أَرُدُّ سَبْيَكُمْ عَلَى عُيُونِكُمْ، قَالَ الرَّبُّ ".
Glory be to the Holy Trinity, our God, forever and unto the ages of all ages. Amen.
Ⲟⲩⲱ̀ⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ϯⲧ̀ⲣⲓⲁⲥ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ Ⲡⲉⲛⲛⲟⲩϯ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛⲉⲙ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲛⲓⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲧⲏⲣⲟⲩ: ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ.
مجداً للثالوث القدوس إلهنا الى أبد الآبدين كلها آمين.
	Zechariah 9:9-15
(زكريا 9: 9-15)
A reading from Zechariah, the prophet. May his holy blessings be with us. Amen.
Ⲉⲃⲟⲗϧⲉⲛ Ⲍⲁⲭⲁⲣⲓⲁⲥ ⲡⲓⲡ̀ⲣⲟⲫⲏⲧⲏⲥ: ⲉ̀ⲣⲉⲡⲉϥⲥ̀ⲙⲟⲩ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ ϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲛⲉⲙⲁⲛ ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ ⲉϥϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ:
من زكريا النبي بركته المقدسة تكون معنا. آمين.
9 “Rejoice greatly, O daughter of Zion! Shout, O daughter of Jerusalem! Behold, your King is coming to you; He is just and having salvation, Lowly and riding on a donkey, A colt, the foal of a donkey.
9 اِبْتَهِجِي جِدًّا يَا ابْنَةَ صِهْيَونَ، وَاهْتِفِي يَا بِنْتَ أُورُشَلِيمَ. هُوَذَا مَلِكُكِ يَأْتِيكِ. عَادِلًا مُخَلِّصًا وَدِيعًا، رَاكِبًا عَلَى أَتَانٍ وَجَحْشٍ ابْنِ أَتَانٍ.
10 I will cut off the chariot from Ephraim And the horse from Jerusalem; The battle bow shall be cut off. He shall speak peace to the nations; His dominion shall be ‘from sea to sea, And from the River to the ends of the earth.’
10 وَأَسْتَأْصِلُ الْعَجَلَةَ مِنْ أَفْرَايِمَ وَالْخَيْلَ مِنْ أُورُشَلِيمَ وَتُسْتَأْصَلُ قَوْسُ الْقِتَالِ. وَيَتَكَلَّمُ بِالسَّلَامِ لِلْأُمَمِ، وَيَكُونُ سُلْطَانُهُ مِنَ الْبَحْرِ إِلَى الْبَحْرِ، وَمِنَ النَّهْرِ إِلَى أَقَاصِي الْأَرْضِ.
11 “As for you also, Because of the blood of your covenant, I will set your prisoners free from the waterless pit.
11 وَبِدَمِ عَهْدِكِ أَنْتِ أَيْضًا أُطْلِقُ أَسْرَاكِ مِنَ الْجُبِّ الَّذِي لَيْسَ فِيهِ مَاءٌ.
12 Return to the stronghold, You prisoners of hope. Even today I declare That I will restore double to you.
12 اِرْجِعُوا إِلَى الْحِصْنِ يَا أَسْرَى الرَّجَاءِ. وَبَدَلَ يَوْمٍ وَاحِدٍ مِنْ سَبْيِكِ سَأَرُدُّ عَلَيْكِ ضِعْفَيْنِ.
13 For I have bent Judah, My bow, Fitted the bow with Ephraim, And raised up your sons, O Zion, Against your sons, O Greece, And made you like the sword of a mighty man.”
13 لِأَنِّي أَوْتَرْتُ يَهُوذَا لِنَفْسِي، مِثْلَ قَوْسٍ مَلَأْتُ أَفْرَايمَ، وَأُقِيمُ أَوْلَادَكِ يَا صِهْيَوْنُ عَلَى بَنِي يَاوَانَ، وَأُقَوِّيكِ كَسَيْفِ مُحَارِبٍ.
14 Then the Lord will be seen over them, And His arrow will go forth like lightning. The Lord God will blow the trumpet, And go with whirlwinds from the south.
14 وَالرَّبُّ يَكُونُ عَلَيْهِمْ، وَقَوسُهُ تَخْرُجُ مِثْلَ الْبَرْقِ، وَالرَّبُّ الْإِلَهُ يُبَوِّقُ بِبُوقٍ عَظِيمٍ، وَيَنْطَلِقُ فِي زَوَابِــعِ الْجَنُوبِ.
15 The Lord of hosts will defend them.
15 رَبُّ الْجُنُودِ يَسْتُرُهُمْ.
Glory be to the Holy Trinity, our God, forever and unto the ages of all ages. Amen.
Ⲟⲩⲱ̀ⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ϯⲧ̀ⲣⲓⲁⲥ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ Ⲡⲉⲛⲛⲟⲩϯ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛⲉⲙ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲛⲓⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲧⲏⲣⲟⲩ: ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ.
مجداً للثالوث القدوس إلهنا الى أبد الآبدين كلها آمين.