Stand in the fear of God and listen to the Holy Gospel. A reading from the Gospel according to our teacher Saint Luke the Evangelist, and the pure disciple. May his blessings be with us all.
قِفُوا بِخَوْفِ اللهِ، وَأَنْصِتُوا لِسَمَاعِ الإِنْجِيلِ الْمُقَدَّسِ. فَصْلٌ مِنْ بِشَارَةِ الإِنْجِيلِ لِمُعَلِّمِنَا مَارْ لوقا الْبَشِيرِ، التِّلْمِيذِ الطَّاهِرِ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
From the Psalms of our teacher David the prophet. May his blessings be with us all.
مِنْ مَزَامِيرِ تَرَاتِيلِ مُعَلِّمِنَا دَاوُدَ النَّبِيِّ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
Matins Psalm
المزمور
	Psalms 87:2-3
(مزامير 87: 2-3)
Incline Your ear to my cry. For my soul is full of troubles, And my life draws near to the grave. I am counted with those who go down to the pit.
Ⲣⲉⲕ ⲡⲉⲕⲙⲁϣϫ ⲉ̀ⲡⲁϯϩⲟ: ϫⲉ ⲁⲥⲙⲟϩ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉⲧϩⲱⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲧⲁⲯⲩⲭⲏ: ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲡⲁⲱⲛϧ ⲁϥϧⲱⲛⲧ ⲉ̀ⲁ̀ⲙⲉⲛϯ: ⲁⲩⲟⲡⲧ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲛⲏⲉⲑⲛⲁ ⲉ̀ϧ̀ⲣⲏⲓ ⲉ̀ⲫ̀ⲗⲁⲕⲕⲟⲥ: ⲁ︦ⲗ︦.
أَمِلْ يَا رَبُّ سَمْعَكَ إِلَى طِلْبَتِي، فَقَدِ اِمْتَلَأْتْ مِنَ الشَّرِّ نَفْسِي، وَدَنَتْ مِنَ الْجَحِيمِ حَيَاتِي. حُسِبْتُ مَعَ الْمُنْحَدِرِينَ فِي الْجُبِّ.
People:
Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
الليلويا.
	Psalm Trailer for the Pope or a Bishop
(Ⲙⲁⲣⲟⲩϭⲁⲥϥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲧ̀ⲉⲕⲕ̀ⲗⲏⲥⲓⲁ̀...)
People:
Amen Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲙⲏⲛ Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
امين الليلويا.
Then the introduction to the Gospel is read.
ثم تقال مقدمة الأنجيل وهي:
Reader:
Blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord. Our Lord, God, Savior and King of us all, Jesus Christ, Son of the living God to whom is glory forever. Amen.
القارﺉُ:
مباركٌ الآتي باسمِ الربِّ إلهِ القواتِ، ربُّنا وإلهُنا ومخلصُنا وملكُنا كلِّنا، يسوعُ المسيحُ، ابنُ اللهِ الحيِّ، الذي لهُ المجدُ إلى الأبدِ. آمين.
Matins Gospel
الإنجيل
	Luke 12:16-21
(لوقا 12: 16-21)
16 Then He spoke a parable to them, saying: “The ground of a certain rich man yielded plentifully.
Ⲁϥϫⲉ ⲟⲩⲡⲁⲣⲁⲃⲟⲗⲏ ⲇⲉ ⲛⲱⲟⲩ ⲉϥϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ϫⲉ ⲛⲉ ⲟⲩⲟⲛ ⲟⲩⲣⲱⲙⲓ ⲛ̀ⲣⲁⲙⲁⲟ̀ ⲉ̀ⲁⲥⲉⲣϣⲁⲩ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲉϥⲭⲱⲣⲁ.
16 وَكَلَّمَهُمْ بِمَثَلٍ قَائِلًا: " رَجُلٌ غَنِيٌّ أَخْصَبَتْ كُورَتُهُ،
17 And he thought within himself, saying, ‘What shall I do, since I have no room to store my crops?’
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛⲁϥⲙⲟⲕⲙⲉⲕ ⲡⲉ ⲛ̀ϧ̀ⲣⲏⲓ ⲛ̀ϧⲏⲧϥ ⲉϥϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ϫⲉ ⲟⲩ ⲡⲉϯⲛⲁⲁⲓϥ ϫⲉ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲛϯ ⲙⲁ ⲙ̀ⲙⲁⲩ ⲉⲑⲣⲓⲑⲱⲟⲩϯ ⲛⲛⲁⲟⲩⲧⲁϩ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟϥ.
17 فَفَكَّرَ فِي نَفْسِهِ قَائِلًا: مَاذَا أَصَنْعُ، فَإِنَّهُ لَيْسَ لِي مَوْضِعٌ أُخَزِّنُ فِيهِ غِلَالِي؟
18 So he said, ‘I will do this: I will pull down my barns and build greater, and there I will store all my crops and my goods.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ϫⲉ ⲫⲁⲓ ϯⲛⲁⲁⲓϥ ϯⲛⲁϣⲟⲣϣⲉⲣ ⲛ̀ⲛⲁⲁ̀ⲡⲟⲑⲏⲕⲏ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ϯⲛⲁⲕⲟⲧⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ⲛⲓϣϯ ⲛ̀ϩⲟⲩⲟ̀ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛⲧⲁⲑⲱⲟⲩϯ ⲉ̀ⲙⲁⲩ ⲙ̀ⲡⲁⲥⲟⲩⲟ̀ ⲧⲏⲣϥ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲛⲁⲁⲅⲁⲑⲟⲛ.
18 ثُمَّ قَالَ: أَصْنَعُ هَذَا: أَهْدِمُ أَهْرَائِيِ وَأَبْنِي أَكْبَرَ مِنْهَا، وَأُخَزِّنُ هُنَاكَ جَمِيعَ أَرْزَاقِي وَخَيْرَاتِي،
19 And I will say to my soul, “Soul, you have many goods laid up for many years; take your ease; eat, drink, and be merry.”’
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ϯⲛⲁϫⲟⲥ ⲛ̀ⲧⲁⲯⲩⲭⲏ ϫⲉ ⲧⲁ ⲯⲩⲭⲏ ⲟⲩⲟⲛ ⲟⲩⲙⲏϣ ⲛ̀ⲁⲅⲁⲑⲟⲛ ⲭⲏ ⲉ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩⲙⲏϣ ⲛ̀ⲣⲟⲙⲡⲓ ⲙ̀ⲧⲟⲛ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟ ⲟⲩⲱⲙ ⲥⲱ ⲟⲩⲛⲟϥ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟ.
19 وَأَقُولُ لِنَفْسِي: يَا نَفْسِي إِنَّ لَكِ خَيْرَاتٍ كَثِيرَةً، مَوْضُوعَةً لِسِنِينَ كَثِيرَةٍ. فَاسْتَرِيحِي وَكُلِي وَاشْرَبِي وَتَنَعَّمِي.
20 But God said to him, ‘Fool! This night your soul will be required of you; then whose will those things be which you have provided?’
Ⲡⲉϫⲉ ⲫϯ ⲇⲉ ⲛⲁϥ ϫⲉ ⲡⲓⲁⲧϩⲏⲧ ⲛ̀ϧ̀ⲣⲏⲓ ϧⲉⲛ ⲡⲁⲓⲉ̀ϫⲱⲣϩ ⲥⲉⲛⲁⲱⲗⲓ ⲛⲧⲉⲕⲯⲩⲭⲏ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ⲛ̀ϧⲏⲧⲕ ⲛⲏⲉⲧⲁⲕⲑⲟⲩⲱⲧⲟⲩ ⲉⲩⲛⲁϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲛ̀ⲛⲓⲙ.
20 فَقَالَ لَهُ اللَّهُ: يَا جَاهِلُ! فِي هَذِهِ اللَّيْلَةِ تُطْلَبُ نَفْسُكَ مِنْكَ، فَهَذَا الَّذِي أَعْدَدْتَهُ لِمَنْ يَكُونُ؟
21 “So is he who lays up treasure for himself, and is not rich toward God.”
Ⲫⲁⲓ ⲡⲉ ⲙ̀ⲫ̀ⲣⲏϯ ⲙ̀ⲫⲏⲉⲧϩⲓⲟⲩⲓ̀ ⲛⲁϥ ⲉ̀ϧⲟⲩⲛ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉϥⲟⲓ ⲛⲣⲁⲙⲁⲟ ⲁⲛ ϧⲉⲛ ⲫϯ.
21 فَهَكَذَا مَنْ يَدَّخِرُ لِنَفْسِهِ وَهُوَ غَيْرُ غَنِيٍّ بِمَا لِلَّهِ ".