Stand in the fear of God and listen to the Holy Gospel. A reading from the Gospel according to our teacher Saint Luke the Evangelist, and the pure disciple. May his blessings be with us all.
قِفُوا بِخَوْفِ اللهِ، وَأَنْصِتُوا لِسَمَاعِ الإِنْجِيلِ الْمُقَدَّسِ. فَصْلٌ مِنْ بِشَارَةِ الإِنْجِيلِ لِمُعَلِّمِنَا مَارْ لوقا الْبَشِيرِ، التِّلْمِيذِ الطَّاهِرِ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
From the Psalms of our teacher David the prophet. May his blessings be with us all.
مِنْ مَزَامِيرِ تَرَاتِيلِ مُعَلِّمِنَا دَاوُدَ النَّبِيِّ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
Vespers Psalm
المزمور
	Psalms 86:2,5,7
(مزامير 86: 2,5,7)
Glorious things are spoken of you, O city of God! And the Most High Himself shall establish her forever. The dwelling of all within you is as the dwelling of those that rejoice.
Ⲁⲩⲥⲁϫⲓ ⲉⲑⲃⲏϯ ⲛ̀ϩⲁⲛϩ̀ⲃⲏⲟⲩⲓ ⲉⲩⲧⲁⲓⲏⲟⲩⲧ: ϯⲃⲁⲕⲓ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ Ⲫϯ: ⲛ̀ⲑⲟϥ ⲡⲉⲧϭⲟⲓⲥ ⲁϥϩⲓⲥⲉⲛϯ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ϣⲁⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ: ⲓⲥϫⲉ ⲉ̀ⲣⲉ ⲫ̀ⲙⲁⲛϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲛⲏⲉⲧⲟⲩⲛⲟϥ ⲧⲏⲣⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ϧⲏϯ. ⲁ︦ⲗ︦.
أَعْمَالٌ مَجِيدَةٌ قَدْ قِيلَتْ لأَجْلِكِ، يَا مَدِينةَ اللَّهِ. وَهُوَ الْعَلِيُّ الَّذِي أسَّسَهَا إِلَى الأَبَدِ. لِأَنَّ سُكنَى الْفَرِحِينَ جَمِيعِهِمْ فِيكِ. هَلِّلُويَا.
People:
Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
الليلويا.
	Psalm Trailer for the Pope or a Bishop
(Ⲙⲁⲣⲟⲩϭⲁⲥϥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲧ̀ⲉⲕⲕ̀ⲗⲏⲥⲓⲁ̀...)
People:
Amen Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲙⲏⲛ Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
امين الليلويا.
Then the introduction to the Gospel is read.
ثم تقال مقدمة الأنجيل وهي:
Reader:
Blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord. Our Lord, God, Savior and King of us all, Jesus Christ, Son of the living God to whom is glory forever. Amen.
القارﺉُ:
مباركٌ الآتي باسمِ الربِّ إلهِ القواتِ، ربُّنا وإلهُنا ومخلصُنا وملكُنا كلِّنا، يسوعُ المسيحُ، ابنُ اللهِ الحيِّ، الذي لهُ المجدُ إلى الأبدِ. آمين.
Vespers Gospel
الإنجيل
	Luke 10:38-42
(لوقا 10: 38-42)
38 Now it happened as they went that He entered a certain village; and a certain woman named Martha welcomed Him into her house.
Ⲉⲩⲙⲟϣⲓ ⲇⲉ ⲁϥϣⲉ ⲛⲁϥ ⲉϧⲟⲩⲛ ⲉ̀ⲟⲩϯⲙⲓ ⲟⲩⲥ̀ϩⲓⲙⲓ ⲉ̀ⲡⲉⲥⲣⲁⲛ ⲡⲉ ⲙⲁⲣⲑⲁ ⲁⲥϣⲟⲡϥ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟⲥ ⲉ̀ϧⲟⲩⲛ ⲉ̀ⲡⲉⲥⲏⲓ.
38 وَفِيمَا هُمْ سَائِرُونَ دَخَلَ قَرْيَةً، فَقَبِلَتْهُ امْرَأَةٌ اسْمُهَا مَرْثَا في بَيْتِهَا.
39 And she had a sister called Mary, who also sat at Jesus’ feet and heard His word.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛⲉ ⲟⲩⲟⲛⲧⲉ ⲑⲁⲓ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩⲥⲱⲛⲓ ⲉⲩⲙⲟⲩϯ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟⲥ ϫⲉ ⲙⲁⲣⲓⲁ̀ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉⲧⲁⲥϩⲉⲙⲥⲓ ϧⲁⲧⲉⲛ ⲛⲉⲛϭⲁⲗⲁⲩϫ ⲙ̀Ⲡⲟ︦ⲥ︦ ⲛⲁⲥⲥⲱⲧⲉⲙ ⲉ̀ⲡⲉϥⲥⲁϫⲓ.
39 وَكَانَتْ لِهذِهِ أُخْتٌ تُدْعَى مَرْيَمَ، وَهِيَ الَّتِي جَلَسَتْ عِنْدَ قَدَمَيْ يَسُوعَ وَكَانَتْ تَسْمَعُ كَلَامَهُ.
40 But Martha was distracted with much serving, and she approached Him and said, “Lord, do You not care that my sister has left me to serve alone? Therefore tell her to help me.”
Ⲙⲁⲣⲑⲁ ⲇⲉ ⲛⲁⲥϭⲓ ⲛ̀ϩ̀ⲣⲁⲥ ⲡⲉ ⲙ̀ⲡ̀ⲕⲱϯ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩⲙⲏϣ ⲛ̀ϣⲉⲙϣⲓ ⲉⲧⲁⲥⲟϩⲓ ⲉ̀ⲣⲁⲧⲥ ⲡⲉϫⲁⲥ ϫⲉ Ⲡⲟ︦ⲥ︦ ⲥ̀ⲉⲣⲙⲉⲗⲓ ⲛⲁⲕ ⲁⲛ ϫⲉ ⲁ ⲧⲁⲥⲱⲛⲓ ⲭⲁⲧ ⲙ̀ⲙⲁⲩⲁⲧ ⲉⲓϣⲉⲙϣⲓ ⲁ̀ϫⲟⲥ ⲟⲩⲛ ⲛⲁⲥ ϩⲓⲛⲁ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉⲥϯⲧⲟⲧⲥ ⲛⲏⲓ.
40 وَأمَّا مَرْثا فَكَانَتْ مُرْتَبِكَةً في قَضَاءِ خِدَمٍ كَثِيرَةٍ. فَقَامَتْ وَقَالَتْ: " يَا رَبُّ، أَمَا يُعْنِيكَ أَمْرِي بِأَنَّ أُخْتِي قَدْ تَرَكَتْنِي أَخْدُمُ وَحْدِي؟ فَقُلْ لَهَا أَنْ تُسَاعدَنِي ".
41 And Jesus answered and said to her, “Martha, Martha, you are worried and troubled about many things.
Ⲁϥⲉⲣⲟⲩⲱ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ Ⲓⲏ︦ⲥ︦ ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ⲛⲁⲥ ϫⲉ ⲙⲁⲣⲑⲁ ⲙⲁⲣⲑⲁ ⲉϥⲓⲣⲱⲟⲩϣ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲧⲉϣ̀ⲧⲉⲣⲑⲱⲣ ⲉⲑⲃⲉ ⲟⲩⲙⲏϣ.
41 فَأَجَابَ يَسُوعُ وَقَالَ لَهَا: " مَرْثَا، مَرْثَا، أَنْتِ تَهْتَمِّينَ وَتَضْطَرِبِينَ لأَجْلِ أُمُورٍ كَثِيرَةٍ،
42 But one thing is needed, and Mary has chosen that good part, which will not be taken away from her.”
Ϩⲁⲛⲕⲟⲩϫⲓ ⲇⲉ ⲡⲉ ϯⲭ̀ⲣⲓⲁ ⲓⲉ ⲟⲩⲁⲓ ⲙⲁⲣⲓⲁ̀ ⲇⲉ ⲁⲥⲥⲱⲧⲡ ⲛⲁⲥ ⲛ̀ϯⲧⲟⲓ ⲉⲑⲛⲁⲛⲉⲥ ⲑⲏ ⲧⲉⲛ̀ⲥⲉⲛⲁϣ̀ⲟⲗϥ ⲛ̀ⲧⲟⲧⲥ ⲁⲛ
42 وَلكِنَّ الْحَاجَةَ إِلَى وَاحِدٍ. وَأمَّا مَرْيَمُ فَاخْتَارَتْ لَهَا النَّصِيبَ الصَّالِحَ الَّذِي لَنْ يُنْزَعَ مِنْهَا إِلَى الأَبَدِ ".