Stand in the fear of God and listen to the Holy Gospel. A reading from the Gospel according to our teacher Saint Luke the Evangelist, and the pure disciple. May his blessings be with us all.
قِفُوا بِخَوْفِ اللهِ، وَأَنْصِتُوا لِسَمَاعِ الإِنْجِيلِ الْمُقَدَّسِ. فَصْلٌ مِنْ بِشَارَةِ الإِنْجِيلِ لِمُعَلِّمِنَا مَارْ لوقا الْبَشِيرِ، التِّلْمِيذِ الطَّاهِرِ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
From the Psalms of our teacher David the prophet. May his blessings be with us all.
مِنْ مَزَامِيرِ تَرَاتِيلِ مُعَلِّمِنَا دَاوُدَ النَّبِيِّ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
Liturgy Psalm
المزمور
	Psalms 30:26,19
(مزامير 30: 26,19)
Oh, love the Lord, all you His saints! For the Lord preserves the faithful. Oh, how great is Your goodness, Which You have laid up for those who fear You.
Ⲙⲉⲛⲣⲉ Ⲡ̀ⲟ︦ⲥ︦ ⲛⲏⲉ︦ⲑ︦ⲩ︦ ⲧⲏⲣⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲁϥ: ϫⲉ ⲁϥⲕⲱϯ ⲛ̀ⲥⲁ ϩⲁⲛⲙⲉⲑⲙⲏⲓ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ Ⲡ̀ⲟ︦ⲥ︦. Ⲓⲥϫⲉⲕ ⲥ̀ⲟϣ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲡ̀ⲁ̀ϣⲁⲓ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲧⲉⲕⲙⲉⲧⲭ̀ⲣⲏⲥⲧⲟⲥ Ⲡ̀ⲟ︦ⲥ︦: ⲑⲏⲉⲧⲁⲕⲁ̀ⲣⲉϩ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟⲥ ⲛ̀ⲛⲏⲉⲧⲉⲣϩⲟϯ ϧⲁⲧⲉⲕϩⲏ. Ⲁ︦ⲗ︦.
أَحِبُّوا الرَّبَّ يَا جَمِيعَ قِدِّيسِيهِ؛ لِأَنَّ الرَّبَّ ابْتَغَى الْحَقَائِقَ. مَا أَعْظَمَ كَثْرَةَ صَلَاحِكَ يَا رَبُّ، الَّذِي ادَّخَرْتَهُ للَّذِينَ يَخَافُونَكَ. هَلِّلُويَا.
People:
Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
الليلويا.
	Psalm Trailer for the Pope or a Bishop
(Ⲙⲁⲣⲟⲩϭⲁⲥϥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲧ̀ⲉⲕⲕ̀ⲗⲏⲥⲓⲁ̀...)
People:
Amen Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲙⲏⲛ Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
امين الليلويا.
Then the introduction to the Gospel is read.
ثم تقال مقدمة الأنجيل وهي:
Reader:
Blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord. Our Lord, God, Savior and King of us all, Jesus Christ, Son of the living God to whom is glory forever. Amen.
القارﺉُ:
مباركٌ الآتي باسمِ الربِّ إلهِ القواتِ، ربُّنا وإلهُنا ومخلصُنا وملكُنا كلِّنا، يسوعُ المسيحُ، ابنُ اللهِ الحيِّ، الذي لهُ المجدُ إلى الأبدِ. آمين.
Liturgy Gospel
الإنجيل
	Luke 7:28-35
(لوقا 7: 28-35)
28 For I say to you, among those born of women there is not a greater prophet than John the Baptist; but he who is least in the kingdom of God is greater than he.”
Ϯϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ⲛⲱⲧⲉⲛ ϫⲉ ϧⲉⲛ ⲡ̀ϫⲓⲛⲙⲓⲥⲓ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲓϩⲓⲟ̀ⲙⲓ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲛ ϩ̀ⲗⲓ ⲛⲁⲁϥ ⲉ̀ⲓⲱⲁⲛⲛⲏ ⲥ ⲡⲓⲕⲟⲩϫⲓ ⲇⲉ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟϥ ϧⲉⲛ ϯⲙⲉⲧⲟⲩⲣⲟ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲛⲓⲫⲏⲟⲩⲓ̀ ⲟⲩⲛⲓϣϯ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟϥ ⲡⲉ.
28 أَقُولُ لَكُمْ: " إِنَّهُ لَيْسَ في مَوَالِيدِ النِّسَاءِ نَبِيٌّ أَعْظَمَ مِنْ يُوحَنَّا الْمَعْمَدَانِ، وَلَكِنَّ الأَصْغَرَ في مَلَكُوتِ اللَّهِ أَعْظَمُ مِنْهُ ".
29 And when all the people heard Him, even the tax collectors justified God, having been baptized with the baptism of John.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ ⲧⲏⲣϥ ⲉⲙ ⲛⲓⲧⲉⲗⲱⲛⲏ ⲥ ⲁⲩⲑ̀ⲙⲁⲓⲉ̀ ⲫϯ ⲉⲧⲁⲩϭⲓⲱⲙⲥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲡⲓⲱⲙⲥ ⲛ̀ⲓⲱⲁⲛⲛⲏⲥ.
29 وَجَمِيعُ الشَّعْبِ إِذْ سَمِعُوا وَالْعَشَّارُونَ بَرَّرُوا اللَّهَ مُعْتَمِدِينَ بِمَعْمُودِيَّةِ يُوحَنَّا.
30 But the Pharisees and lawyers rejected the will of God for themselves, not having been baptized by him.
Ⲛⲓⲫⲁⲣⲓⲥⲉⲟⲥ ⲇⲉ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲛⲓⲛⲟⲙⲓⲕⲟⲥ ⲁⲩⲉⲣⲁⲑⲉⲧⲓⲛ ⲙ̀ⲡⲓⲥⲟϭⲛⲓ ⲛⲧⲉ ⲫϯ ⲛ̀ϧ̀ⲣⲏⲓ ⲛ̀ϧⲏ ⲧⲟⲩ ⲙ̀ⲡⲟⲩϭⲓⲱⲙⲥ ⲛ̀ⲧⲟⲧϥ.
30 وَأَمَّا الْفَرِّيسِيُّونَ وَالنَّامُوسِيُّونَ فَرَفَضُوا مَشُورَةَ اللَّهِ مِنْ جِهَةِ أَنْفُسِهِمْ، وَلَمْ يَعْتَمِدُوا مِنْهُ.
31 And the Lord said, “To what then shall I liken the men of this generation, and what are they like?
Ⲁⲓⲛⲁⲧⲉⲛⲑⲱⲛⲧ ⲉⲛⲓⲣⲱⲙⲓ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲡⲁⲓϫⲱⲟⲩ ⲉ̀ⲟⲩ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲟⲩ ⲡⲉ ⲉ̀ⲧⲟⲩⲟ̀ⲛⲓ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟϥ.
31 ثُمَّ قَالَ الرَّبُّ: «فَبِمَنْ أُشَبِّهُ أُنَاسَ هَذَا الْجِيلِ وَمَاذَا يُشْبِهُونَ؟
32 They are like children sitting in the marketplace and calling to one another, saying: ‘We played the flute for you, And you did not dance; We mourned to you, And you did not weep.’
Ⲥⲉⲟ̀ⲛⲓ ⲛ̀ϩⲁⲛⲁ̀ⲗⲱⲟⲩⲓ̀ ⲛⲏⲉⲧϩⲉⲙⲥⲓ ϧⲉⲛ ⲟⲩⲁⲅⲟⲣⲁ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉⲩⲙⲟⲩϯ ⲟⲩⲃⲉ ⲛⲟⲩⲉⲣⲏ ⲟⲩ ⲉⲩϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ϫⲉ ⲁⲛϫⲱ ⲉ̀ⲣⲱⲧⲉⲛ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲙⲡⲉⲧⲉⲛϭⲟⲥϫⲉⲥ ⲁⲛⲉⲣϩⲏⲃⲓ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉⲧⲉⲛⲣⲓⲙⲓ.
32 يُشْبِهُونَ أَوْلَادًا جَالِسِينَ في السُّوقِ يُنَادُونَ بَعْضُهُمْ بَعْضًا قَائِلِينَ: زَمَّرْنَا لَكُمْ فَلَمْ تَرْقُصُوا! نُحْنَا لَكُمْ فَلَمْ تَبْكُوا!
33 For John the Baptist came neither eating bread nor drinking wine, and you say, ‘He has a demon.’
Ⲁϥⲓ̀ ⲅⲁⲣ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲓⲱⲁⲛⲛⲏⲥ ⲡⲓⲣⲉϥϯⲱⲙⲥ ⲉϥⲟⲩⲉⲙ ⲱⲓⲕ ⲁⲛ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛ̀ϥ̀ⲥⲉ ⲏⲣⲡ ⲁⲛ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲧⲉⲧⲉⲛϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ϫⲉ ⲟⲩⲟⲛ ⲟⲩⲇⲉⲙⲱⲛ ⲛⲉⲙⲁϥ.
33 لِأَنَّهُ جَاءَ يُوحَنَّا الْمَعْمَدَانُ لَا يَأْكُلُ خُبْزًا وَلَا يَشْرَبُ خَمْرًا، فَتَقُولُونَ: بِهِ شَيْطَانٌ.
34 The Son of Man has come eating and drinking, and you say, ‘Look, a glutton and a winebibber, a friend of tax collectors and sinners!’
Ⲁϥⲓ̀ ⲇⲉ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲡ̀ϣⲏⲣⲓ ⲙ̀ⲫ̀ⲣⲱⲙⲓ ⲉϥⲟⲩⲱⲙ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉϥⲥⲱ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲧⲉⲧⲉⲛϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ϩⲏⲡⲡⲉ ⲓⲥ ⲟⲩⲣⲱⲙⲓ ⲛ̀ⲣⲉϥⲟⲩⲱⲙ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛ̀ⲥⲁⲩ ⲏⲣⲡ ⲉϥⲟⲓ ⲛ̀ϣ̀ⲫⲏⲣ ⲉ̀ⲛⲓⲧⲉⲗⲱⲛⲏⲥ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲛⲓⲣⲉϥⲉⲣⲛⲟⲃⲓ.
34 جَاءَ ابْنُ الْإِنْسَانِ يَأْكُلُ وَيَشْرَبُ، فَتَقُولُونَ: هُوَذَا إِنْسَانٌ أَكُولٌ وَشِرِّيبُ خَمْرٍ،مُحِبٌّ لِلْعَشَّارِينَ وَالْخُطَاةِ.
35 But wisdom is justified by all her children.”
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁⲥⲑ̀ⲙⲁⲓⲟ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ϯⲥⲟⲫⲓⲁ̀ ⲉⲃⲟⲗ ϧⲉⲛ ⲛⲉⲥϣⲏⲣⲓ ⲧⲏⲣⲟⲩ.
35 وَالْحِكْمَةُ تَبَرَّرَتْ مِنْ جَمِيعِ بَنِيهَا.