Stand in the fear of God and listen to the Holy Gospel. A reading from the Gospel according to our teacher Saint Matthew the Evangelist, and the pure disciple. May his blessings be with us all.
قِفُوا بِخَوْفِ اللهِ، وَأَنْصِتُوا لِسَمَاعِ الإِنْجِيلِ الْمُقَدَّسِ. فَصْلٌ مِنْ بِشَارَةِ الإِنْجِيلِ لِمُعَلِّمِنَا مَارْ متى الْبَشِيرِ، التِّلْمِيذِ الطَّاهِرِ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
From the Psalms of our teacher David the prophet. May his blessings be with us all.
مِنْ مَزَامِيرِ تَرَاتِيلِ مُعَلِّمِنَا دَاوُدَ النَّبِيِّ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
Vespers Psalm
المزمور
	Psalms 67:33,4
(مزامير 67: 33,4)
O God, You are more awesome than Your holy places. The God of Israel is He who gives strength and power to His people. But let the righteous be glad; Let them rejoice before God; Yes, let them rejoice exceedingly.
Ⲟⲩϣ̀ⲫⲏⲣⲓ ⲡⲉ Ⲫϯ ϧⲉⲛ ⲛⲏⲉ̀ⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ ⲛ̀ⲧⲁϥ: Ⲫϯ ⲙ̀ⲡ̀Ⲓⲥ︦ⲗ︦ ⲛ̀ⲑⲟϥ ⲉϥⲉ̀ϯ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩϫⲟⲙ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲟⲩⲁⲙⲁϩⲓ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉϥⲗⲁⲟⲥ: ⲛⲓⲑ̀ⲙⲏⲓ ⲙⲁⲣⲟⲩⲟⲩⲛⲟϥ ⲙⲁⲣⲟⲩⲉⲗⲏⲗ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉⲙ̀ⲑⲟ ⲙ̀Ⲫϯ: ⲙⲁⲣⲟⲩⲟⲩⲛⲟϥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲟⲩⲟⲩⲛⲟϥ. ⲁ︦ⲗ︦.
عَجِيبٌ هُوَ اللَّهُ في قِدِّيسِيهِ. إلَهُ إسْرَائِيلَ هُوَ يُعْطِي قُوَّةً وَعِزًّا لِشَعْبِهِ. وَالصِّدِّيقُونَ يَفْرَحُونَ وَيَتَهَلَّلُونَ أمَامَ اللَّهِ، وَيَتَنَعَّمُونَ بِالسُّرُورِ. هَلِّلُويَا.
People:
Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
الليلويا.
	Psalm Trailer for the Pope or a Bishop
(Ⲙⲁⲣⲟⲩϭⲁⲥϥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲧ̀ⲉⲕⲕ̀ⲗⲏⲥⲓⲁ̀...)
People:
Amen Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲙⲏⲛ Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
امين الليلويا.
Then the introduction to the Gospel is read.
ثم تقال مقدمة الأنجيل وهي:
Reader:
Blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord. Our Lord, God, Savior and King of us all, Jesus Christ, Son of the living God to whom is glory forever. Amen.
القارﺉُ:
مباركٌ الآتي باسمِ الربِّ إلهِ القواتِ، ربُّنا وإلهُنا ومخلصُنا وملكُنا كلِّنا، يسوعُ المسيحُ، ابنُ اللهِ الحيِّ، الذي لهُ المجدُ إلى الأبدِ. آمين.
Vespers Gospel
الإنجيل
	Matthew 10:16-23
(متى 10: 16-23)
16 “Behold, I send you out as sheep in the midst of wolves. Therefore be wise as serpents and harmless as doves.
Ϩⲏⲡⲡⲉ ⲁ̀ⲛⲟⲕ ϯⲟⲩⲱⲣⲡ ⲙ̀ⲙⲱⲧⲉⲛ ⲙ̀ⲫ̀ⲣⲏϯ ⲛ̀ϩⲁⲛⲉ̀ⲥⲱⲟⲩ ϧⲉⲛ ⲑ̀ⲙⲏϯ ⲛ̀ϩⲁⲛⲟⲩⲱⲛϣ ϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲟⲩⲛ ⲉ̀ⲣⲉⲧⲉⲛⲟⲓ ⲛ̀ⲥⲁⲃⲉ ⲙ̀ⲫ̀ⲣⲏϯ ⲛ̀ⲛⲓϩⲟϥ ⲁ̀ⲕⲉⲣⲉⲟⲥ ⲇⲉ ⲙ̀ⲫ̀ⲣⲏϯ ⲛ̀ⲛⲓ ϭⲣⲟⲙⲡⲓ.
16 هَا أَنَا أُرْسِلُكُمْ كَخِرَافٍ في وَسَطِ ذِئَابٍ فَكُونُوا حُكَمَاءَ كَالْحَيَّاتِ وَبُسَطَاءَ كَالْحَمَامِ.
17 But beware of men, for they will deliver you up to councils and scourge you in their synagogues.
Ⲙⲁϩⲑⲏⲧⲉⲛ ⲇⲉ ⲉ̀ⲣⲱⲧⲉⲛ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗϩⲁ ⲛⲓⲣⲱⲙⲓ ⲥⲉⲛⲁϯ ⲑⲏⲛⲟⲩ ⲅⲁⲣ ⲉ̀ϩⲁⲛⲙⲁⲛ̀ϯϩⲁⲡ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲥⲉⲛⲁⲉⲣⲙⲁⲥⲧⲓⲅⲅⲟⲓⲛ ⲙ̀ⲙⲱⲧⲉⲛ ϧⲉⲛ ⲛⲟⲩⲥⲩⲛⲁⲅⲱⲅⲏ.
17 وَاحْذَرُوا مِنَ النَّاسِ؛ لِأَنَّهُمْ سَيُسَلِّمُونَكُمْ إِلَى مَجَالِسَ وفي مَجَامِعِهِمْ يَجْلِدُونَكُمْ.
18 You will be brought before governors and kings for My sake, as a testimony to them and to the Gentiles.
Ⲉⲩⲉ̀ⲉ̀ⲛ ⲑⲏⲛⲟⲩ ⲇⲉ ⲛ̀ⲛⲓⲟⲩⲣⲱⲟⲩ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲛⲓϩⲏⲅⲉⲙⲱⲛ ⲉⲑⲃⲏⲧ ⲉⲩⲙⲉⲧⲙⲉⲑⲣⲉ ⲛⲱⲟⲩ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲛⲓⲉⲑⲛⲟⲥ.
18 وَتُقَدَّمُونَ أَمَامَ مُلُوكٍ وَوُلَاةٍ مِنْ أَجْلِي شَهَادَةً لَهُمْ وَلِلأُمَمِ.
19 But when they deliver you up, do not worry about how or what you should speak. For it will be given to you in that hour what you should speak;
Ⲉ̀ϣⲱⲡ ⲇⲉ ⲁⲩϣⲁⲛϯ ⲑⲏⲛⲟⲩ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉⲣϥⲓⲣⲱⲟⲩϣ ϫⲉ ⲡⲱⲥ ⲓⲉ ⲟⲩ ⲡⲉ ⲧⲉⲧⲉⲛⲛⲁϫⲟϥ ⲥⲉⲛⲁϯ ⲅⲁⲣ ⲛⲱⲧⲉⲛ ϧⲉⲛ ϯⲟⲩⲛⲟⲩ ⲉ̀ⲧⲉⲙ̀ⲙⲁⲩ ⲙ̀ⲫⲏⲉ̀ⲧⲉⲧⲉⲛⲛⲁⲥⲁϫⲓ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟϥ.
19 فَمَتَى أَسْلَمُوكُمْ فَلَا تَهْتَمُّوا كَيْفَ أوْ بِمَا تَتَكَلَّمُونَ؛ لِأَنَّكُمْ تُعْطَوْنَ في تِلْكَ السَّاعَةِ مَا تَتَكَلَّمُونَ بِهِ.
20 for it is not you who speak, but the Spirit of your Father who speaks in you.
Ⲛ̀ⲑⲱⲧⲉⲛ ⲅⲁⲣ ⲁⲛ ⲡⲉⲑⲛⲁⲥⲁϫⲓ ⲁⲗⲗⲁ ⲡⲓⲡⲛ︦ⲁ︦ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲡⲉⲧⲉⲛⲓⲱⲧ ⲉⲑⲛⲁⲥⲁϫⲓ ϧⲉⲛ ⲑⲏⲛⲟⲩ.
20 لِأَنَّكُمْ لَسْتُمْ أَنْتُمُ الْمُتَكَلِّمِينَ بَلْ رُوحُ أَبِيكُمُ الَّذِي يَتَكَلَّمُ فِيكُمْ.
21 “Now brother will deliver up brother to death, and a father his child; and children will rise up against parents and cause them to be put to death.
Ⲉ̀ⲣⲉ ⲟⲩⲥⲟⲛ ⲇⲉ ⲉϥⲉ̀ϯ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩⲥⲟⲛ ⲉ̀ⲫ̀ⲙⲟⲩ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉ̀ⲣⲉ ⲟⲩⲓⲱⲧ ⲉϥⲉ̀ϯ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩϣⲏⲣⲓ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉ̀ⲣⲉ ϩⲁⲛϣⲏⲣⲓ ⲧⲱⲟⲩⲛⲟⲩ ⲉ̀ϫⲉⲛ ⲛⲟⲩⲓⲟϯ ⲉⲩⲉ̀ϧⲟⲑⲃⲟⲩ.
21 وَسَيُسَلِّمُ الأَخُ أَخَاهُ إِلَى الْمَوْتِ وَيُسَلِّمُ الأَبُ وَلَدَهُ، وَيَقُومُ الأَوْلَادُ عَلَى آبَائِهِمْ وَيَقْتُلُونَهُمْ.
22 And you will be hated by all for My name’s sake. But he who endures to the end will be saved.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉ̀ⲣⲉⲧⲉⲛⲉ̀ϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲉⲩⲙⲟⲥϯ ⲙ̀ⲙⲱⲧⲉⲛ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲟⲩⲟⲛ ⲛⲓⲃⲉⲛ ⲉⲑⲃⲉ ⲡⲁⲣⲁⲛ ⲫⲏ ⲇⲉ ⲉⲑⲛⲁⲁ̀ⲙⲟⲛⲓ ⲛ̀ⲧⲟⲧϥ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ⲫⲁⲓ ⲡⲉⲑⲛⲁⲛⲟϩⲉⲙ.
22 وَتَكُونُونَ مُبْغَضِينَ مِنَ الْجَمِيعِ مِنْ أَجْلِ اسْمِي، وَالَّذِي يَصْبِرُ إِلَى الْمُنْتَهَى فَهذَا يَخْلُصُ.
23 When they persecute you in this city, flee to another. For assuredly, I say to you, you will not have gone through the cities of Israel before the Son of Man comes.
Ⲉ̀ϣⲱⲡ ⲇⲉ ⲁⲩϣⲁⲛϭⲟϫⲓ ⲛ̀ⲥⲱⲧⲉⲛ ϧⲉⲛ ⲧⲁⲓⲃⲁⲕⲓ ⲫⲱⲧ ⲉ̀ⲕⲉⲟⲩⲓ̀ ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ ϯϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ⲛⲱⲧⲉⲛ ϫⲉ ⲛ̀ⲛⲉⲧⲉⲛⲫⲟϩ ⲉ̀ⲙⲉϣⲧ ⲛⲓⲃⲁⲕⲓ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ Ⲡⲓ︦ⲥ︦ⲗ︦ ϣⲁⲧⲉϥⲓ̀ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ Ⲡ̀ϣⲏⲣⲓ ⲙ̀Ⲫ̀ⲣⲱⲙⲓ.
23 فَإذَا طَرَدُوكُم مِنْ هذِهِ الْمَدِينَةِ فَاهْرُبُوا إِلَى الأُخْرَى، فَإنِّي الْحَقَّ أَقُولُ لَكُمْ: لَا تُتَمِّمُونَ جَوَلَانَ مُدُنِ إسْرَائِيلَ حَتَّى يَأْتِيَ ابْنُ الْإِنْسَانِ.