Stand in the fear of God and listen to the Holy Gospel. A reading from the Gospel according to our teacher Saint Matthew the Evangelist, and the pure disciple. May his blessings be with us all.
قِفُوا بِخَوْفِ اللهِ، وَأَنْصِتُوا لِسَمَاعِ الإِنْجِيلِ الْمُقَدَّسِ. فَصْلٌ مِنْ بِشَارَةِ الإِنْجِيلِ لِمُعَلِّمِنَا مَارْ متى الْبَشِيرِ، التِّلْمِيذِ الطَّاهِرِ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
From the Psalms of our teacher David the prophet. May his blessings be with us all.
مِنْ مَزَامِيرِ تَرَاتِيلِ مُعَلِّمِنَا دَاوُدَ النَّبِيِّ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
Vespers Psalm
المزمور
	Psalms 67:33,4
(مزامير 67: 33,4)
O God, You are more awesome than Your holy places. The God of Israel is He who gives strength and power to His people. But let the righteous be glad; Let them rejoice before God; Yes, let them rejoice exceedingly.
Ⲟⲩϣ̀ⲫⲏⲣⲓ ⲡⲉ Ⲫϯ ϧⲉⲛ ⲛⲏⲉ̀ⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ ⲛ̀ⲧⲁϥ: Ⲫϯ ⲙ̀ⲡ̀Ⲓⲥ︦ⲗ︦ ⲛ̀ⲑⲟϥ ⲉϥⲉ̀ϯ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩϫⲟⲙ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲟⲩⲁⲙⲁϩⲓ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉϥⲗⲁⲟⲥ: ⲛⲓⲑ̀ⲙⲏⲓ ⲙⲁⲣⲟⲩⲟⲩⲛⲟϥ ⲙⲁⲣⲟⲩⲉⲗⲏⲗ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉⲙ̀ⲑⲟ ⲙ̀Ⲫϯ: ⲙⲁⲣⲟⲩⲟⲩⲛⲟϥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲟⲩⲟⲩⲛⲟϥ. ⲁ︦ⲗ︦.
عَجِيبٌ هُوَ اللَّهُ في قِدِّيسِيهِ. إلَهُ إسْرَائِيلَ هُوَ يُعْطِي قُوَّةً وَعِزًّا لِشَعْبِهِ. وَالصِّدِّيقُونَ يَفْرَحُونَ وَيَتَهَلَّلُونَ أمَامَ اللَّهِ، وَيَتَنَعَّمُونَ بِالسُّرُورِ. هَلِّلُويَا.
People:
Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
الليلويا.
	Psalm Trailer for the Pope or a Bishop
(Ⲙⲁⲣⲟⲩϭⲁⲥϥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲧ̀ⲉⲕⲕ̀ⲗⲏⲥⲓⲁ̀...)
People:
Amen Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲙⲏⲛ Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
امين الليلويا.
Then the introduction to the Gospel is read.
ثم تقال مقدمة الأنجيل وهي:
Reader:
Blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord. Our Lord, God, Savior and King of us all, Jesus Christ, Son of the living God to whom is glory forever. Amen.
القارﺉُ:
مباركٌ الآتي باسمِ الربِّ إلهِ القواتِ، ربُّنا وإلهُنا ومخلصُنا وملكُنا كلِّنا، يسوعُ المسيحُ، ابنُ اللهِ الحيِّ، الذي لهُ المجدُ إلى الأبدِ. آمين.
Vespers Gospel
الإنجيل
	Matthew 24:42-47
(متى 24: 42-47)
42 Watch therefore, for you do not know what hour your Lord is coming.
Ⲣⲱⲓⲥ ⲟⲩⲛ ϫⲉ ⲧⲉⲧⲉⲛⲥⲱⲟⲩⲛ ⲁⲛ ϫⲉ ⲁ̀ⲣⲉ ⲡⲉⲧⲉⲛⲟ︦ⲥ︦ ⲛⲏⲟⲩ ϧⲉⲛ ⲁϣ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩⲛⲟⲩ.
42 اسْهَرُوا إِذًا لِأَنَّكُمْ لَا تَعْلَمُونَ في أَيَّةِ سَاعَةٍ يَأتِي رَبُّكُمْ.
43 But know this, that if the master of the house had known what hour the thief would come, he would have watched and not allowed his house to be broken into.
Ⲫⲁⲓ ⲇⲉ ⲁ̀ⲣⲓⲉ̀ⲙⲓ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟϥ ϫⲉ ⲉ̀ⲛⲁⲣⲉ ⲡⲓⲛⲉⲃⲏⲓ ⲉ̀ⲙⲓ ϫⲉ ⲁ̀ⲣⲉ ⲡⲓⲥⲟⲛⲓ ⲛⲏⲟⲩ ⲛⲁϥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲁϣ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩⲛⲟⲩ ⲛⲁϥⲛⲁⲣⲱⲓⲥ ⲡⲉ ϩⲓⲛⲁ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉϥϣ̀ⲧⲉⲙⲭⲁϥ ⲉ̀ϭⲓ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉϥⲏⲓ.
43 وَاعْلَمُوا هَذَا: أَنَّهُ لَوْ كَانَ رَبُّ الْبَيْتِ يَعْلَمُ في أَيَّةِ سَاعَةٍ يَأْتِي السَّارِقُ، لَسَهِرَ وَلَمْ يَدَعْ بَيْتَهُ يُنْهَبُ.
44 Therefore you also be ready, for the Son of Man is coming at an hour you do not expect.
Ⲉⲑⲃⲉ ⲫⲁⲓ ϩⲱⲧⲉⲛ ϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲉ̀ⲣⲉⲧⲉⲛⲥⲉⲃⲧⲱⲧ ϫⲉ ϧⲉⲛ ϯⲟⲩⲛⲟⲩ ⲉ̀ⲧⲉⲧⲉⲛⲥⲱⲟⲩⲛ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ⲁⲛ ⲁ̀ⲣⲉ Ⲡ̀ϣⲏⲣⲓ ⲙ̀Ⲫ̀ⲣⲱⲙⲓ ⲛⲏⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ϧⲏⲧⲥ.
44 لِذلِكَ كُونُوا أَنْتُمْ أَيْضًا مُسْتَعِدِّينَ؛ لِأَنَّهُ في السَّاعَةِ الَّتِي لَا تَعْرِفُونَها يَأْتِي ابْنُ الْإِنْسَانِ فِيهَا.
45 “Who then is a faithful and wise servant, whom his master made ruler over his household, to give them food in due season?
Ⲛⲓⲙ ϩⲁⲣⲁ ⲡⲉ ⲡⲓⲡⲓⲥⲧⲟⲥ ⲙ̀ⲃⲱⲕ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛ̀ⲥⲁⲃⲉ ⲫⲏⲉ̀ⲧⲉ ⲡⲉϥⲟ︦ⲥ︦ ⲛⲁⲭⲁϥ ⲉ̀ϩ̀ⲣⲏⲓ ⲉ̀ϫⲉⲛ ⲛⲉϥⲉ̀ⲃⲓⲁⲓⲕ ⲉ̀ϯⲛⲱⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲟⲩϧ̀ⲣⲉ ϧⲉⲛ ⲡ̀ⲥⲏⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲏⲓⲥ.
45 فَمَنْ هُوَ يَا تُرَى الْعَبْدُ الأَمِينُ وَالْحَكِيمُ الَّذِي يُقِيمُهُ سَيِّدُهُ عَلَى عَبِيدِهِ لِيُعْطِيَهُمْ طَعَامَهُمْ في حِينِهِ؟
46 Blessed is that servant whom his master, when he comes, will find so doing.
Ⲱ̀ⲟⲩⲛⲓⲁⲧϥ ⲙ̀ⲡⲓⲃⲱⲕ ⲉ̀ⲧⲉⲙ̀ⲙⲁⲩ ⲉ̀ϣⲱⲡ ⲁϥϣⲁⲛⲓ̀ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲡⲉϥⲟ︦ⲥ︦ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉϥϫⲉⲙϥ ⲉϥⲓ̀ⲣⲓ ⲙ̀ⲡⲁⲓⲣⲏϯ.
46 طُوبَى لِذلِكَ الْعَبْدِ الَّذِي إذَا جَاءَ سَيِّدُهُ يَجِدُهُ يَفْعَلُ هكَذَا،
47 Assuredly, I say to you that he will make him ruler over all his goods.
Ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ ϯϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ⲛⲱⲧⲉⲛ ϫⲉ ϥ̀ⲛⲁⲭⲁϥ ⲉ̀ϩ̀ⲣⲏⲓ ⲉ̀ϫⲉⲛ ⲡⲉⲧⲉⲛⲧⲁϥ ⲧⲏⲣϥ.
47 الْحَقَّ أَقُولُ لَكُمْ: إِنَّهُ يُقِيمُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِ أَمْوَالِهِ.