Pauline Epistle
البولس
	Introduction to the Coptic Pauline Epistle
(Ⲡⲁⲩⲗⲟⲥ ⲫ̀ⲃⲱⲕ...)
	Conclusion to the Coptic Pauline Epistle
(Ⲡⲓϩ̀ⲙⲟⲧ ⲅⲁⲣ...)
	Response to the Pauline Epistle
(Ⲡⲓϩ̀ⲙⲟⲧ ⲅⲁⲣ...)
	Great Response to the Pauline Epistle
(Ⲡⲓϩ̀ⲙⲟⲧ ⲅⲁⲣ...)
	Alternate Response to the Pauline Epistle
(Ⲏ ⲁ̀ⲅⲁⲡⲏ...)
	Hymn of the Virtues
(Ϯⲙⲏϯ ⲥ̀ⲛⲟⲩϯ...)
	The Blessed
(Ⲧⲟⲩ ⲙⲁⲕⲁⲣⲓⲱ)
	Hebrews 12:21-13:2
(العبرانيين 12: 21-13: 2)
Reader:
Paul, the servant of our Lord Jesus Christ, called to be an apostle, appointed to the Gospel of God. A reading from the Epistle of our teacher Paul to the Hebrews. May his holy blessings be with us. Amen.
القارﺉُ:
بولس عبد يسوع المسيح الرسول المدعو المفرز لبشرى الله. فصل من رسالة معلمنا بولس الرسول الى العبرانيين بركته تكون معنا. آمين.
21 Moses said, “I am exceedingly afraid and trembling.”
Ⲙⲱⲩ̀ⲥⲏⲥ ⲅⲁⲣ ⲁϥϫⲟⲥ ϫⲉ ϯⲟⲓ ⲛ̀ϩⲟϯ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ϯⲥ̀ⲑⲉⲣⲉⲧⲉⲣ.
21 لِأَنَّ مُوسَى قَال: " إنِّي مُرْتَعِبٌ وَمُرْتَعِدٌ ".
22 But you have come to Mount Zion and to the city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, to an innumerable company of angels,
Ⲁⲗⲗⲁ ⲁⲣⲉⲧⲉⲛⲓ̀ ϩⲁ ⲡⲓⲧⲱⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲥⲓⲱⲛ ⲛⲉⲙ ϯⲃⲁⲕⲓ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲫϯ ⲉⲧⲟⲛϧ ⲓ̀ⲗ︦ⲏ︦ⲙ︦ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲧ̀ⲫⲉ ⲛⲉⲙ ϩⲁⲛⲑ̀ⲃⲁ ⲛ̀ⲁⲅⲅⲉⲗⲟⲥ ⲉⲩⲉⲣϣⲁⲓ.
22 بَلْ قَدْ أَتَيْتُمْ إِلَى جَبَلِ صِهْيَوْنَ، وَإِلَى مَدِينَةِ اللَّهِ الْحَيِّ. أُورُشَلِيمَ السَّمَاوِيَّةِ، وَإِلَى رَبَوَاتِ الْمَلَائِكَةِ الْمُعَيِّدِينَ.
23 to the general assembly and church of the firstborn who are registered in heaven, to God the Judge of all, to the spirits of just men made perfect,
Ⲛⲉⲙ ⲟⲩⲉⲕⲕ̀ⲗⲏⲥⲓⲁ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ϩⲁⲛϣⲁⲙⲓⲥⲓ ⲉⲥⲥ̀ϧⲏⲟⲩⲧ ϧⲉⲛ ⲛⲓⲫⲏⲟⲩⲓ̀ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲡⲓⲣⲉϥϯϩⲁⲡ ⲫϯ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲟⲩⲟⲛ ⲛⲓⲃⲉⲛ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲡⲓⲡⲛ︦ⲁ︦ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲛⲓⲑ̀ⲙⲏⲓ ⲉⲧϫⲏⲕ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ.
23 وَكَنِيسَةِ أبْكَارٍ مَكْتُوبِينَ في السَّمَاواتِ، وَإِلَى اللَّهِ دَيَّانِ الْجَمِيعِ، وَإِلَى أَرْوَاحِ أَبْرَارٍ مُكَمَّلِينَ،
24 to Jesus the Mediator of the new covenant, and to the blood of sprinkling that speaks better things than that of Abel.
Ⲛⲉⲙ Ⲓⲏ︦ⲥ︦ ⲡⲓⲙⲉⲥⲓⲧⲏⲥ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ϯⲇⲓⲁ̀ⲑⲏⲕⲏ ⲙ̀ⲃⲉⲣⲓ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲟⲩⲥ̀ⲛⲟϥ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲟⲩⲛⲟⲩϫϧ ⲉϥⲥⲁϫⲓ ⲉ̀ϩⲟⲧⲉ ⲫⲁ ⲁⲃⲉⲗ.
24 وَإِلَى يَسُوعَ وَسِيطِ الْعَهْدِ الْجَدِيدِ، وَإِلَى دَمِ رَشٍّ يَتَكَلَّمُ أَفْضَلَ مِنْ دَمِ هَابِيلَ.
25 See that you do not refuse Him who speaks. For if they did not escape who refused Him who spoke on earth, much more shall we not escape if we turn away from Him who speaks from heaven,
Ⲁ̀ⲛⲁⲩ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉⲣⲉⲣⲡⲁⲣⲁⲧⲓⲥⲑⲉ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉⲧⲥⲁϫⲓ ⲓⲥϫⲉ ⲅⲁⲣ ⲛⲏ ⲙ̀ⲡⲟⲩϣ̀ⲫⲱⲧ ϩⲓϫⲉⲛ ⲡⲓⲕⲁϩⲓ ⲉⲧⲁⲩⲉⲣⲡⲁⲣⲁⲧⲓⲥⲑⲉ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉⲧⲥⲁϫⲓ ⲛ̀ϩⲟⲩⲟ̀ ⲙⲁⲗⲗⲟⲛ ⲁ̀ⲛⲟⲛ ϧⲁ ⲛⲏⲉⲑⲛⲁⲕⲉⲧ ϩ̀ⲣⲁⲩ ⲥⲁⲃⲟⲗ ⲙ̀ⲫⲏⲉⲧⲁϥⲓ̀ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ϧⲉⲛ ⲛⲓⲫⲏⲟⲩⲓ̀.
25 اُنْظُرُوا أَنْ لَا تَسْتَعْفُوا مِنَ الْمُتَكَلِّمِ. لِأَنَّهُ إِنْ كَانَ أُولئِكَ لَمْ يَنْجُوا إذِ اسْتَعْفَوْا مِنَ الْمُتَكَلِّمِ عَلَى الأَرْضِ، فَبِالأَوْلَى جِدًّا لَا نَنْجُو نَحْنُ الَّذِينَ نُوَلِّي وُجُوهَنا عَنِ الَّذِي جَاءَ مِنَ السَّمَاوَاتِ!
26 whose voice then shook the earth; but now He has promised, saying, “Yet once more I shake not only the earth, but also heaven.”
Ⲫⲏⲉⲧⲁ ⲧⲉϥⲥ̀ⲙⲏ ⲕⲓⲙ ⲙ̀ⲡⲓⲕⲁϩⲓ ⲙ̀ⲡⲓⲥⲏ ⲟⲩ ϯⲛⲟⲩ ⲇⲉ ⲁϥⲱϣ ⲉϥϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ϫⲉ ⲉⲧⲓ ⲕⲉⲥⲟⲡ ⲁ̀ⲛⲟⲕ ϯⲛⲁⲙⲟⲛⲙⲉⲛ ⲟⲩ ⲙⲟⲛⲟⲛ ⲉ̀ⲡ̀ⲕⲁϩⲓ ⲁⲗⲗⲁ ⲛⲉⲙ ϯⲕⲉⲫⲉ.
26 الَّذِي صَوْتُهُ زَلْزَلَ الأَرْضَ حِينَئِذٍ، وَأمَّا الآنَ فَقَدْ وَعَدَ قَائِلًا: " إنِّي مَرَّةً أُخْرَى أُزَلْزِلُ لَا الأَرْضَ فَقَطْ بَلِ السَّمَاءَ أيْضًا ".
27 Now this, “Yet once more,” indicates the removal of those things that are being shaken, as of things that are made, that the things which cannot be shaken may remain.
Ⲡⲓⲉⲧⲓ ⲇⲉ ⲛ̀ⲕⲉⲥⲟⲡ ⲉϥⲧⲁⲙⲟ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲛ ⲉⲩⲟⲩⲱⲧⲉⲃ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲛⲏⲉⲧⲟⲩⲕⲓⲙ ⲉ̀ⲣⲱⲟⲩ ϩⲱⲥ ⲉⲩⲑ̀ⲙⲁⲓⲏⲟⲩⲧ ϩⲓⲛⲁ ⲛ̀ⲧⲟⲩϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲉⲩⲥ̀ⲙⲟⲛⲧ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲛⲏⲉⲧⲉⲛ̀ⲥⲉⲕⲓⲙ ⲁⲛ.
27 فَقَوْلُهُ " مَرَّةً أُخْرَى " يَدُلُّنَا عَلَى تَغْيِيرِ وَزَوَالِ الأشْيَاءِ الْمُتَزَعْزِعَةِ كَمَخْلُوقَةٍ، لِكَيْ تَبْقَى ثَابِتَةً الَّتِي لَا تَتَزَعْزَعُ.
28 Therefore, since we are receiving a kingdom which cannot be shaken, let us have grace, by which we may serve God acceptably with reverence and godly fear.
Ⲉⲑⲃⲉⲫⲁⲓ ⲉⲛⲛⲁϭⲓ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩⲙⲉⲧⲟⲩⲣⲟ ⲛ̀ⲁⲧⲕⲓⲙ ⲙⲁⲣⲉⲛϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲉ̀ⲟⲩⲟⲛ ϩ̀ⲙⲟⲧ ⲛ̀ⲧⲟⲧⲉⲛ ⲫⲁⲓ ⲉⲧⲉⲛⲛⲁϣⲉⲙϣⲓ ⲙ̀ⲫϯ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ϩⲓⲧⲟⲧϥ ⲉⲛⲣⲁⲛⲁϥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲟⲩϩⲟϯ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲟⲩⲥ̀ⲑⲉⲣⲧⲉⲣ.
28 لِذلِكَ وَنَحْنُ قَابِلُونَ مَلَكُوتًا لَا يَتَزَعْزَعُ لِتَكُنْ عِنْدَنَا نِعْمَةٌ بِهَا نَخْدِمُ اللَّهَ وَنُرْضِيهُ، بِخَوْفٍ وَرِعْدَةٍ.
29 For our God is a consuming fire.
Ⲕⲉ ⲅⲁⲣ ⲡⲉⲛⲛⲟⲩϯ ⲟⲩⲭ̀ⲣⲱⲙ ⲉϥⲟⲩⲱⲙ ⲡⲉ
29 لِأَنَّ " إلَهَنَا هُوَ نَارٌ آكِلَةٌ ".
1 Let brotherly love continue.
Ϯⲙⲉⲧⲙⲁⲓⲥⲟⲛ ⲙⲁⲣⲉⲥϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲉⲥⲥ̀ⲙⲟⲛⲧ.
1 لِتَثْبُتِ الْمَحَبَّةُ الأَخَوِيَّةُ.
2 Do not forget to entertain strangers, for by so doing some have unwittingly entertained angels.
Ϯⲙⲉⲧⲙⲁⲓϣⲉⲙⲙⲟ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉⲣⲉⲣⲡⲉⲥⲱⲃϣ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ⲅⲁⲣ ϩⲓⲧⲉⲛ ⲑⲁⲓ ϧⲉⲛ ⲟⲩⲉⲃϣⲓ ⲁ ϩⲁⲛⲟⲩⲟⲛ ϣⲉⲡ ϩⲁⲛⲁⲅⲅⲉⲗⲟⲥ ⲉ̀ⲣⲱⲟⲩ.
2 وَمَحْبَّةُ الْغُرَبَاءِ لَا تَنْسَوْهَا؛ لِأَنْ بِهَا أَضَافَ أُنَاسٌ مَلَائِكَةً وَهُمْ لَا يَدْرُونَ.
The grace of God the Father be with you all. Amen.
نعمة الله الآب تكون مع جميعِكم. آمين.