Stand in the fear of God and listen to the Holy Gospel. A reading from the Gospel according to our teacher Saint Mark the Evangelist, and the pure disciple. May his blessings be with us all.
قِفُوا بِخَوْفِ اللهِ، وَأَنْصِتُوا لِسَمَاعِ الإِنْجِيلِ الْمُقَدَّسِ. فَصْلٌ مِنْ بِشَارَةِ الإِنْجِيلِ لِمُعَلِّمِنَا مَارْ مرقس الْبَشِيرِ، التِّلْمِيذِ الطَّاهِرِ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
From the Psalms of our teacher David the prophet. May his blessings be with us all.
مِنْ مَزَامِيرِ تَرَاتِيلِ مُعَلِّمِنَا دَاوُدَ النَّبِيِّ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
Matins Psalm
المزمور
	Psalms 95:10,11,12
(مزامير 95: 10,11,12)
Let the heavens rejoice, and let the earth be glad; Let the sea roar, and all its fullness; Then all the trees of the woods will rejoice before the Lord. For He is coming, for He is coming to judge the earth. He shall judge the world with righteousness, And the peoples with His truth.
Ⲙⲁⲣⲟⲩⲟⲩⲛⲟϥ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲛⲓⲫⲏⲟⲩⲓ̀ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲙⲁⲣⲉϥⲑⲉⲗⲏⲗ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲡ̀ⲕⲁϩⲓ: ⲙⲁⲣⲉϥⲕⲓⲙ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲫ̀ⲓⲟⲙ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲡⲉϥⲙⲟϩ ⲧⲏⲣϥ. Ⲉⲩⲉ̀ⲑⲉⲗⲏⲗ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲛⲓϣ̀ϣⲏⲛ ⲧⲏⲣⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲡⲓⲓⲁϩϣ̀ϣⲏⲛ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ϧⲁⲧ̀ϩⲏ ⲙ̀ⲡ̀ϩⲟ ⲙ̀Ⲡ̀ⲟ︦ⲥ︦ ϫⲉ ϥ̀ⲛⲏⲟⲩ: ϫⲉ ϥ̀ⲛⲏⲟⲩ ⲉ̀ϯϩⲁⲡ ⲉ̀ϯⲟⲓⲕⲟⲩⲙⲉⲛⲏ ϧⲉⲛ ⲟⲩⲇⲓⲕⲉⲟ̀ⲥⲩⲛⲏ ⲛⲉⲙ ϩⲁⲛⲗⲁⲟⲥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲧⲉϥⲙⲉⲑⲙⲏⲓ. Ⲁ︦ⲗ︦.
فَلْتَفْرَحِ السَّمَاوَاتُ وَلْتَبْتَهِجِ الْأَرْضُ، وَلْيَتَحَرَّكِ الْبَحْرُ وَكُلُّ مِلْئِهِ. يَبْتَهِجُ كُلُّ شَجَرِ الْغَابِ قُدَّامَ وَجْهِ الرَّبِّ لِأَنَّهُ يَأْتِي. إِنَّهُ يَأْتِي لِيَدِينَ الْمَسْكُونَةَ بِالْعَدْلِ وَالشُّعُوبَ بِحَقِّهِ. هَلِّلُويَا.
People:
Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
الليلويا.
	Psalm Trailer for the Pope or a Bishop
(Ⲙⲁⲣⲟⲩϭⲁⲥϥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲧ̀ⲉⲕⲕ̀ⲗⲏⲥⲓⲁ̀...)
People:
Amen Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲙⲏⲛ Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
امين الليلويا.
Then the introduction to the Gospel is read.
ثم تقال مقدمة الأنجيل وهي:
Reader:
Blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord. Our Lord, God, Savior and King of us all, Jesus Christ, Son of the living God to whom is glory forever. Amen.
القارﺉُ:
مباركٌ الآتي باسمِ الربِّ إلهِ القواتِ، ربُّنا وإلهُنا ومخلصُنا وملكُنا كلِّنا، يسوعُ المسيحُ، ابنُ اللهِ الحيِّ، الذي لهُ المجدُ إلى الأبدِ. آمين.
Matins Gospel
الإنجيل
	Mark 3:28-35
(مرقس 3: 28-35)
28 “Assuredly, I say to you, all sins will be forgiven the sons of men, and whatever blasphemies they may utter;
Ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ ϯϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ⲛⲱⲧⲉⲛ ϫⲉ ϩⲱⲃ ⲛⲓⲃⲉⲛ ⲉⲩⲉ̀ⲭⲁⲩ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ⲛ̀ⲛⲓϣⲏⲣⲓ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲛⲓⲣⲱⲙⲓ ⲛⲓⲛⲟⲃⲓ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲛⲓϫⲉⲟⲩⲁ̀ ⲧⲏⲣⲟⲩ ⲉ̀ⲧⲟⲩⲛⲁϫⲉⲟⲩⲁ̀ ⲙ̀ⲙⲱⲟⲩ.
28 الْحَقَّ أَقُولُ لَكُمْ: إِنَّ كُلَّ شَيْءٍ يُغْفَرُ لِبَنِي الْبَشَرِ، الْخَطَايَا وَجَمِيعَ التَّجَادِيفِ الَّتِي يُجَدِّفُونَهَا.
29 but he who blasphemes against the Holy Spirit never has forgiveness, but is subject to eternal condemnation”—
Ⲫⲏ ⲇⲉ ⲉⲑⲛⲁϫⲉⲟⲩⲁ̀ ⲉ̀ⲡⲠⲓⲡⲛ︦ⲁ︦ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲛ ⲭⲱ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ⲛ̀ⲧⲁϥ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲁⲗⲗⲁ ϥ̀ⲟⲓ ⲛ̀ⲉ̀ⲛⲟⲭⲟⲥ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩϩⲁⲡ ⲛ̀ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ.
29 وَلكِنْ مَنْ يُجَدِّفُ عَلَى الرُّوحِ القُدُسِ فَلَا يُغْفَرُ لَهُ إِلَى الْأَبَدِ، بَلْ هُوَ مُسْتَوْجِبٌ دَيْنُونَةً أَبَدِيَّةً "؛
30 because they said, “He has an unclean spirit.”
Ϫⲉ ⲛⲁⲩϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ϫⲉ ⲟⲩⲟⲛ ⲟⲩⲡⲛ︦ⲁ︦ ⲛ̀ⲁ̀ⲕⲁⲑⲁⲣⲧⲟⲛ ⲛⲉⲙⲁϥ.
30 لِأَنَّهُمْ كَانُوا يَقُولُونَ: " إِنَّ مَعَهُ رُوحًا نَجِسًا ".
31 Then His brothers and His mother came, and standing outside they sent to Him, calling Him.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁⲩⲓ̀ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲧⲉϥⲙⲁⲩ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲛⲉϥⲥ̀ⲛⲏⲟⲩ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁⲩⲟ̀ϩⲓ ⲉ̀ⲣⲁⲧⲟⲩ ⲥⲁⲃⲟⲗ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁⲩⲟⲩⲱⲣⲡ ϩⲁⲣⲟϥ ⲉⲩⲙⲟⲩϯ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟϥ.
31 فَجَاءَتْ أُمُّهُ وَإِخْوَتُهُ وَوَقَفُوا خَارِجًا وَأَرْسَلُوا إِلَيْهِ يَدْعُونَهُ.
32 And a multitude was sitting around Him; and they said to Him, “Look, Your mother and Your brothers are outside seeking You.”
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛⲁⲣⲉ ⲡⲓⲙⲏϣ ϩⲉⲙⲥⲓ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉϥⲕⲱϯ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲡⲉϫⲱⲟⲩ ⲛⲁϥ ϫⲉ ⲓⲥ ⲧⲉⲕⲙⲁⲩ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲛⲉⲕⲥ̀ⲛⲏⲟⲩ ⲥⲁⲃⲟⲗ ⲉⲩⲕⲱϯ ⲛ̀ⲥⲱⲕ.
32 وَكَانَ الْجَمْعُ جَالِسًا حَوْلَهُ، فَقَالُوا لَهُ: " هُوَذَا أُمُّكَ وَإِخْوَتُكَ خَارِجًا يَطْلُبُونَكَ ".
33 But He answered them, saying, “Who is My mother, or My brothers?”
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉ̀ⲧⲁϥⲉ̀ⲣⲟⲩⲱ̀ ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ⲛⲱⲟⲩ ϫⲉ ⲛⲓⲙ ⲧⲉ ⲧⲁⲙⲁⲩ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲛⲁⲥ̀ⲛⲏⲟⲩ.
33 فَأَجَابَهُمْ وَقَالَ: " مَنْ أُمِّي وَإِخْوَتِي؟ "،
34 And He looked around in a circle at those who sat about Him, and said, “Here are My mother and My brothers!
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉ̀ⲧⲁϥϫⲟⲩϣⲧ ⲉ̀ⲛⲏⲉⲧϩⲉⲙⲥⲓ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉϥⲕⲱϯ ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ϫⲉ ⲓⲥ ⲧⲁⲙⲁⲩ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲛⲁⲥ̀ⲛⲏⲟⲩ.
34 ثُمَّ نَظَرَ إِلَى الْجَالِسِينَ حَوْلَهُ وَقَالَ: " هَا أُمِّي وَإِخْوَتِي؛
35 For whoever does the will of God is My brother and My sister and mother.”
Ⲫⲏ ⲅⲁⲣ ⲛⲓⲃⲉⲛ ⲉⲑⲛⲁⲉⲣ ⲡⲉⲧⲉϩⲛⲉ Ⲫϯ ⲫⲁⲓ ⲡⲉ ⲡⲁⲥⲟⲛ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲧⲁⲥⲱⲛⲓ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲧⲁⲙⲁⲩ
35 لِأَنَّ مَنْ يَصْنَعُ إِرَادَةَ اللَّهِ فَهَذَا هُوَ أَخِي وَأُخْتِي وَأُمِّي ".