Stand in the fear of God and listen to the Holy Gospel. A reading from the Gospel according to our teacher Saint Mark the Evangelist, and the pure disciple. May his blessings be with us all.
قِفُوا بِخَوْفِ اللهِ، وَأَنْصِتُوا لِسَمَاعِ الإِنْجِيلِ الْمُقَدَّسِ. فَصْلٌ مِنْ بِشَارَةِ الإِنْجِيلِ لِمُعَلِّمِنَا مَارْ مرقس الْبَشِيرِ، التِّلْمِيذِ الطَّاهِرِ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
From the Psalms of our teacher David the prophet. May his blessings be with us all.
مِنْ مَزَامِيرِ تَرَاتِيلِ مُعَلِّمِنَا دَاوُدَ النَّبِيِّ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
Liturgy Psalm
المزمور
	Psalms 117:13, 18
(مزامير 117: 13, 18)
The Lord is my strength and song, And He has become my salvation. The Lord has chastened me severely, But He has not given me over to death.
Ⲧⲁϫⲟⲙ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲡⲁⲥ̀ⲙⲟⲩ ⲡⲉ Ⲡⲟ︦ⲥ︦: ⲁϥϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲛⲏⲓ ⲉⲩⲥⲱⲧⲏⲣⲓⲁ̀: ϧⲉⲛ ⲟⲩⲥ̀ⲃⲱ ⲅⲁⲣ ⲁϥϯⲥ̀ⲃⲱ ⲛⲏⲓ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ Ⲡⲟ︦ⲥ︦: ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉϥⲧⲏⲓⲧ ⲉ̀ⲧⲟⲧϥ ⲙ̀ⲫ̀ⲙⲟⲩ: ︦ⲁⲗ︦.
قُوَّتِي وَتَسْبِحَتِي هُوَ الرَّبُّ، وَقَدْ صَارَ لِي خَلَاصًا. أَدَبًا أَدَّبَنِي الرَّبُّ، وَإِلَى الْمَوْتِ لَمْ يُسْلِمْنِي.
People:
Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
الليلويا.
	Psalm Trailer for the Pope or a Bishop
(Ⲙⲁⲣⲟⲩϭⲁⲥϥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲧ̀ⲉⲕⲕ̀ⲗⲏⲥⲓⲁ̀...)
People:
Amen Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲙⲏⲛ Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
امين الليلويا.
Then the introduction to the Gospel is read.
ثم تقال مقدمة الأنجيل وهي:
Reader:
Blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord. Our Lord, God, Savior and King of us all, Jesus Christ, Son of the living God to whom is glory forever. Amen.
القارﺉُ:
مباركٌ الآتي باسمِ الربِّ إلهِ القواتِ، ربُّنا وإلهُنا ومخلصُنا وملكُنا كلِّنا، يسوعُ المسيحُ، ابنُ اللهِ الحيِّ، الذي لهُ المجدُ إلى الأبدِ. آمين.
Liturgy Gospel
الإنجيل
	Mark 4:21-29
(مرقس 4: 21-29)
21 Also He said to them, “Is a lamp brought to be put under a basket or under a bed? Is it not to be set on a lampstand?
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛⲁϥϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ⲛⲱⲟⲩ ϫⲉ ⲙⲏⲧⲓ ϣⲁⲩϭⲉⲣⲉ ⲟⲩϧⲏⲃⲥ ϩⲓⲛⲁ ⲛ̀ⲥⲉⲭⲁϥ ϧⲁ ⲡⲓⲙⲉⲛⲧ ⲓⲉ ϧⲁ ⲡⲓϭⲗⲟϫ ⲟⲩⲭⲓ ϩⲓⲛⲁ ⲛ̀ⲥⲉⲭⲁϥ ϩⲓϫⲉⲛ ϯⲗⲩⲭⲛⲓⲁ̀.
21 وَكَانَ يَقُولُ لَهُمْ: " هَلْ يُوقَدُ سِرَاجٌ لِيُوْضَعَ تَحْتَ الْمِكْيَالِ أوْ تَحْتَ السَّرِيرِ؟ ألَيْسَ لِكَيْ يُوضَعَ عَلَى الْمَنَارَةِ؟
22 For there is nothing hidden which will not be revealed, nor has anything been kept secret but that it should come to light.
Ⲟⲩ ⲅⲁⲣ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲛ ⲡⲉⲧϩⲏⲡ ⲁϥϣ̀ⲧⲉⲙⲟⲩⲱⲛϩ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ⲟⲩⲇⲉ ⲙ̀ⲡⲁϥϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲉϥϩⲏⲡ ⲉ̀ⲃⲏⲗ ϫⲉ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉϥⲓ̀ ⲉϥⲟⲩⲱⲛϩ.
22 فَإِنَّهُ لَيْسَ شَيءٌ خَفِيٌّ إِلَّا وَيُظْهَرُ، وَلَا كَانَ مَكْتُومًا إِلَّا وَيُعْلَـنُ.
23 If anyone has ears to hear, let him hear.”
Ⲫⲏⲉ̀ⲧⲉ ⲟⲩⲟⲛ ⲙⲁϣϫ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟϥ ⲉ̀ⲥⲱⲧⲉⲙ ⲙⲁⲣⲉϥⲥⲱⲧⲉⲙ.
23 مَـنْ لَـهُ أُذُنَـانِ لِلسَّـمْعِ، فَلْيَسْـمَعْ ".
24 Then He said to them, “Take heed what you hear. With the same measure you use, it will be measured to you; and to you who hear, more will be given.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛⲁϥϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ⲛⲱⲟⲩ ⲟⲛ ϫⲉ ⲁ̀ⲛⲁⲩ ϫⲉ ⲟⲩ ⲡⲉ ⲧⲉⲧⲉⲛⲥⲱⲧⲉⲙ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟϥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲡⲓϣⲓ ⲉ̀ⲧⲉⲧⲉⲛⲛⲁϣⲓ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟϥ ⲉⲩⲛⲁϣⲓ ⲛⲱⲧⲉⲛ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟϥ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲟⲩⲧⲟⲩϩⲟ ⲛⲱⲧⲉⲛ ϧⲁ ⲛⲏⲉⲧⲥⲱⲧⲉⲙ.
24 وَكَانَ يَقُولُ لَهُمْ أيْضًا: " تَأمَّلُوا مَا تَسْمَعُونَ! بِالْكَيْلِ الَّذِي بِهِ تَكِيلُونَ يُكَالُ لَكُمْ وَيُزَادُ لَكُمْ أيُّهَا السَّامِعُونَ.
25 For whoever has, to him more will be given; but whoever does not have, even what he has will be taken away from him.”
Ⲫⲏ ⲅⲁⲣ ⲉ̀ⲧⲉ ⲟⲩⲟⲛⲧⲁϥ ⲉⲩⲉ̀ϯ ⲛⲁϥ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲫⲏⲉ̀ⲧⲉ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲛⲧⲁϥ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲫⲏⲉ̀ⲧⲉ ⲛ̀ⲧⲟⲧϥ ϣⲁⲩⲟⲗϥ ⲛ̀ⲧⲟⲧϥ.
25 فَإِنَّ مَنْ لَهُ يُعْطَى وَيُزَادُ، وَمَنْ لَيْسَ لَهُ فَالَّذِي عِنْـدَهُ يُنْـزَعُ مِنْـهُ ".
26 And He said, “The kingdom of God is as if a man should scatter seed on the ground,
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛⲁϥϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ϫⲉ ⲡⲁⲓⲣⲏϯ ⲡⲉ ϯⲙⲉⲧⲟⲩⲣⲟ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ Ⲫϯ ⲙ̀ⲫ̀ⲣⲏϯ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩⲣⲱⲙⲓ ⲉϥϩⲓⲟⲩⲓ̀ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉϥϫ̀ⲣⲟϫ ϩⲓϫⲉⲛ ⲡⲓⲕⲁϩⲓ.
26 وَقَالَ: " هَكَذَا مَلَكُوتُ اللَّهِ: كَمِثْلِ رَجُلٍ يُبْذِرُ الْبِذَارَ فِي الأَرْضِ،
27 and should sleep by night and rise by day, and the seed should sprout and grow, he himself does not know how.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉϥⲉⲛⲕⲟⲧ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉϥⲧⲱⲛϥ ⲙ̀ⲡⲓⲉ̀ϫⲱⲣϩ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲡⲓⲉ̀ϩⲟⲟⲩ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ϣⲁⲣⲉ ⲡⲓϫ̀ⲣⲟϫ ⲑⲏⲛⲓ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ϣⲁϥϣⲓⲏ̀ ϩⲱⲥ ⲛ̀ϥ̀ⲉ̀ⲙⲓ ⲁⲛ ⲛ̀ⲑⲟϥ.
27 وَيَنَامُ وَيَقُومُ لَيْلًا وَنَهَارًا، وَالزَّرْعُ يَنْمِي وَيَطُولُ، وَهُوَ لَا يَشْعُرُ،
28 For the earth yields crops by itself: first the blade, then the head, after that the full grain in the head.
Ϣⲁⲣⲉ ⲡⲓⲕⲁϩⲓ ⲙ̀ⲙⲁⲩⲁⲧϥ ϯⲟⲩⲧⲁϩ ⲛ̀ϣⲟⲣⲡ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩⲥⲓⲙ ⲓ̀ⲧⲁ ⲟⲩϧⲉⲙⲥ ⲓ̀ⲧⲁ ϣⲁϥⲙⲟϩ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲫⲏⲉⲧ ϧⲉⲛ ⲡⲓϧⲉⲙⲥ.
28 لِأَنَّ الأَرْضَ مِنْ نَفْسِهَا تُخْرِجُ أَوَّلًا الْعُشْبَ، ثُمَّ السُّنْبُلَ، ثُمَّ الْحِنْطَةَ مُمْتَلِئَةً فِي السُّنْبُلِ.
29 But when the grain ripens, immediately he puts in the sickle, because the harvest has come.”
Ⲉ̀ϣⲱⲡ ⲇⲉ ⲁϥϣⲁⲛⲫⲟϩ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲡⲓⲟⲩⲧⲁϩ ⲥⲁⲧⲟⲧϥ ϣⲁϥⲟⲩⲱⲣⲡ ⲙ̀ⲡⲓⲟⲥϧ ϫⲉ ⲟⲩⲏⲓ ⲅⲁⲣ ⲁϥⲓ̀ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲡⲓⲱⲥϧ.
29 فَإِذَا أَدْرَكَ الثَّمَرُ، فَلِلْوَقْتِ يُعْمِلُ الْمِنْجَلَ لِأَنَّ الْحَصَادَ قَدْ حَانَ ".