Stand in the fear of God and listen to the Holy Gospel. A reading from the Gospel according to our teacher Saint John the Evangelist, and the pure disciple. May his blessings be with us all.
قِفُوا بِخَوْفِ اللهِ، وَأَنْصِتُوا لِسَمَاعِ الإِنْجِيلِ الْمُقَدَّسِ. فَصْلٌ مِنْ بِشَارَةِ الإِنْجِيلِ لِمُعَلِّمِنَا مَارْ يوحنا الْبَشِيرِ، التِّلْمِيذِ الطَّاهِرِ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
From the Psalms of our teacher David the prophet. May his blessings be with us all.
مِنْ مَزَامِيرِ تَرَاتِيلِ مُعَلِّمِنَا دَاوُدَ النَّبِيِّ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
Matins Psalm
المزمور
	Psalms 23:3,4
(مزامير 23: 3,4)
Who may ascend into the hill of the Lord? Or who may stand in His holy place? He who has clean hands and a pure heart.
Ⲛⲓⲙ ⲉⲑⲛⲁϣ̀ϣⲉ ⲉ̀ϩ̀ⲣⲏⲓ ⲉ̀ϫⲉⲛ ⲡ̀ⲧⲱⲟⲩ ⲙ̀Ⲡ̀ⲟ︦ⲥ︦: ⲓⲉ ⲛⲓⲙ ⲉⲑⲛⲁϣ̀ⲟ̀ϩⲓ ⲉ̀ⲣⲁⲧϥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲡⲉϥⲙⲁ ⲉ︦ⲑ︦ⲩ︦. Ⲉϥⲟⲩⲁⲃ ϧⲉⲛ ⲛⲉϥϫⲓϫ: ⲉϥⲧⲟⲩⲃⲏⲟⲩⲧ ϧⲉⲛ ⲡⲉϥϩⲏⲧ. Ⲁ︦ⲗ︦.
مَنْ يَقْدِرُ أَنْ يَصْعَدَ إِلَى جَبَلِ الرَّبِّ؟ أَوْ مَنْ يَقُومُ فِي مَوْضِعِهِ الْمُقَدَّسِ؟ الطَّاهِرُ بِيَدِيِهِ، النَّقِيُّ بِقَلْبِهِ. هَلِّلُويَا.
People:
Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
الليلويا.
	Psalm Trailer for the Pope or a Bishop
(Ⲙⲁⲣⲟⲩϭⲁⲥϥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲧ̀ⲉⲕⲕ̀ⲗⲏⲥⲓⲁ̀...)
People:
Amen Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲙⲏⲛ Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
امين الليلويا.
Then the introduction to the Gospel is read.
ثم تقال مقدمة الأنجيل وهي:
Reader:
Blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord. Our Lord, God, Savior and King of us all, Jesus Christ, Son of the living God to whom is glory forever. Amen.
القارﺉُ:
مباركٌ الآتي باسمِ الربِّ إلهِ القواتِ، ربُّنا وإلهُنا ومخلصُنا وملكُنا كلِّنا، يسوعُ المسيحُ، ابنُ اللهِ الحيِّ، الذي لهُ المجدُ إلى الأبدِ. آمين.
Matins Gospel
الإنجيل
	John 3:17-21
(يوحنا 3: 17-21)
17 For God did not send His Son into the world to condemn the world, but that the world through Him might be saved.
Ⲛⲉⲧⲁ ⲫϯ ⲅⲁⲣ ⲁⲛ ⲟⲩⲱⲣⲡ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉϥϣⲏ ⲣⲓ ⲉ̀ⲡⲓⲕⲟⲥⲙⲟⲥ ϩⲓⲛⲁ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉϥϯϩⲁⲡ ⲉ̀ⲡⲓⲕⲟⲥⲙⲟⲥ ⲁⲗⲗⲁ ϩⲓⲛⲁ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲡⲓⲕⲟⲥⲙⲟⲥ ⲛⲟϩⲉⲙ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ϩⲓⲧⲟⲧϥ.
17 لأنَّهُ لَمْ يُرْسِلِ اللَّهُ ابْنَهُ إِلَى الْعَالَمِ لِيَدِينَ الْعَالَمَ، بَلْ لِيَخْلُصَ بِهِ الْعَالَمُ.
18 “He who believes in Him is not condemned; but he who does not believe is condemned already, because he has not believed in the name of the only begotten Son of God.
Ⲫⲏⲉⲑⲛⲁϩϯ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟϥ ⲥⲉⲛⲁϯϩⲁⲡ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟϥ ⲁⲛ ⲫⲏ ⲇⲉ ⲉⲧⲉⲛ̀ϥ̀ⲛⲁϩϯ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟϥ ⲁⲛ ϩⲏⲇⲏ ⲁⲩⲟⲩⲱ ⲉⲩϯϩⲁⲡ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟϥ ϫⲉ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉϥⲛⲁϩϯ ⲉ̀ⲫ̀ⲣⲁⲛ ⲙ̀ⲡⲓⲙⲟⲛⲟⲅⲉⲛⲏⲥ ⲛ̀ϣⲏⲣⲓ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲫϯ.
18 مَنْ يُؤْمِنُ بِهِ لَا يُدَانُ، وَمَنْ لَا يُؤْمِنُ بِهِ فَقَدْ دِينَ، لِأَنَّهُ لَمْ يُؤْمِنْ بِاسْمِ ابْنِ اللَّهِ الْوَحِيدِ.
19 And this is the condemnation, that the light has come into the world, and men loved darkness rather than light, because their deeds were evil.
Ⲫⲁⲓ ⲡⲉ ⲡⲓϩⲁⲡ ϫⲉ ⲡⲓⲟⲩⲱⲓⲛⲓ ⲁϥⲒ̀ ⲉ̀ⲡⲓⲕⲟⲥⲙⲟⲥ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛⲓⲣⲱⲙⲓ ⲁⲩⲙⲉⲛⲣⲉ ⲡⲓⲭⲁⲕⲓ ⲙⲁⲗⲗⲟⲛ ⲉ̀ϩⲟⲧⲉ ⲡⲓⲟⲩⲱⲓⲛⲓ ⲛⲟⲩϩⲃⲏⲟⲩⲓ̀ ⲅⲁⲣ ⲛⲁⲩϩⲱⲟⲩ ⲡⲉ.
19 وَهَذِهِ الدَّيْنُونَةُ هِيَ: أَنَّ النُّورَ جَاءَ إِلَى الْعَالَمِ، وَأَحَبَّ النَّاسُ الظُّلْمَةَ أَكْثَرَ مِنَ النُّورِ، لِأَنَّ أَعْمَالَهُمْ كَانَتْ شِرِّيرَةً.
20 For everyone practicing evil hates the light and does not come to the light, lest his deeds should be exposed.
Ⲟⲩⲟⲛ ⲅⲁⲣ ⲛⲓⲃⲉⲛ ⲉⲧⲓ̀ⲣⲓ ⲙ̀ⲡⲓⲡⲉⲧϩⲱⲟⲩ ϥ̀ⲙⲟⲥϯ ⲙ̀ⲡⲓⲟⲩⲱⲓⲛⲓ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲙ̀ⲡⲁϥⲓ̀ ϩⲁ ⲡⲓⲟⲩⲱⲓⲛⲓ ϩⲓⲛⲁ ⲛ̀ⲧⲟⲩϣ̀ⲧⲉⲙⲥⲟϩⲓ ⲛ̀ⲛⲉϥϩ̀ⲃⲏⲟⲩⲒ̀ ϫⲉ ⲥⲉϩⲱⲟⲩ.
20 لِأَنَّ كُلَّ مَنْ يَعْمَلُ الشَرَّ يُبْغِضُ النُّورَ، وَلَا يَأْتِي إِلَى النُّورِ، لِئَلَّا تُوَبَّخَ أَعْمَالُهُ لِأَنَّهَا شِرِيرَةٌ.
21 But he who does the truth comes to the light, that his deeds may be clearly seen, that they have been done in God.”
Ⲫⲏ ⲇⲉ ⲉⲧⲓ̀ⲣⲓ ⲛ̀ϯⲙⲉⲑⲙⲏⲓ ϣⲁϥⲓ̀ ϩⲁ ⲡⲓⲟⲩⲱⲓⲛⲓ ϩⲓⲛⲁ ⲛ̀ⲧⲟⲩⲟⲩⲱⲛϩ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲛⲉϥϩ̀ⲃⲏⲟⲩⲓ̀ ϫⲉ ⲉⲧⲁϥⲁⲓⲧⲟⲩ ϧⲉⲛ ⲫϯ.
21 وَأَمَّا مَنْ يَعْمَلُ الْحَقَّ فَيُقْبِلُ إِلَى النُّورِ، لِكَيْ تَظْهَرَ أَعْمَالُهُ أَنَّهَا بِاللَّهِ مَعْمُولَةٌ ".