Stand in the fear of God and listen to the Holy Gospel. A reading from the Gospel according to our teacher Saint John the Evangelist, and the pure disciple. May his blessings be with us all.
قِفُوا بِخَوْفِ اللهِ، وَأَنْصِتُوا لِسَمَاعِ الإِنْجِيلِ الْمُقَدَّسِ. فَصْلٌ مِنْ بِشَارَةِ الإِنْجِيلِ لِمُعَلِّمِنَا مَارْ يوحنا الْبَشِيرِ، التِّلْمِيذِ الطَّاهِرِ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
From the Psalms of our teacher David the prophet. May his blessings be with us all.
مِنْ مَزَامِيرِ تَرَاتِيلِ مُعَلِّمِنَا دَاوُدَ النَّبِيِّ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
Vespers Psalm
المزمور
	Psalms 14:1-3
(مزامير 14: 1-3)
Lord, who may abide in Your tabernacle? Who may dwell in Your holy hill? He who walks uprightly, And works righteousness, And speaks the truth in his heart.
Ⲡ̀ⲟ︦ⲥ︦ ⲛⲓⲙ ⲉⲑⲛⲁϣⲱⲡⲓ ϧⲉⲛ ⲡⲉⲕⲙⲁⲛϣⲱⲡⲓ: ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲛ ⲛⲓⲙ ⲉⲑⲛⲁϣ̀ⲉⲙⲧⲟⲛ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟϥ ϩⲓϫⲉⲛ ⲡⲉⲕⲧⲱⲟⲩ ⲉ︦ⲑ︦ⲩ︦. Ⲉ̀ⲃⲏⲗ ⲉ̀ⲡⲉⲑⲙⲟϣⲓ ϧⲉⲛ ⲟⲩⲙⲉⲧⲁⲧⲁϭⲛⲓ: ⲉϥⲉⲣϩⲱⲃ ⲛ̀ⲑ̀ⲙⲏⲓ ⲉϥⲥⲁϫⲓ ⲛ̀ⲑ̀ⲙⲏⲓ ϧⲉⲛ ⲡⲉϥϩⲏⲧ. Ⲁ︦ⲗ︦.
يَا رَبُّ مَنْ يَسْكُنُ فِي مَسْكَنِكَ؟ أَوْ مَنْ يَحُلُّ فِي جَبَلِكَ الْمُقَدَّسِ؟ إِلَّا السَّالِكُ بِلَا عَيْبٍ، وَيَعْمَلُ الْبِرَّ وَيَتَكَلَّمُ الْحَقَّ فِي قَلْبِهِ. هَلِّلُويَا.
People:
Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
الليلويا.
	Psalm Trailer for the Pope or a Bishop
(Ⲙⲁⲣⲟⲩϭⲁⲥϥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲧ̀ⲉⲕⲕ̀ⲗⲏⲥⲓⲁ̀...)
People:
Amen Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲙⲏⲛ Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
امين الليلويا.
Then the introduction to the Gospel is read.
ثم تقال مقدمة الأنجيل وهي:
Reader:
Blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord. Our Lord, God, Savior and King of us all, Jesus Christ, Son of the living God to whom is glory forever. Amen.
القارﺉُ:
مباركٌ الآتي باسمِ الربِّ إلهِ القواتِ، ربُّنا وإلهُنا ومخلصُنا وملكُنا كلِّنا، يسوعُ المسيحُ، ابنُ اللهِ الحيِّ، الذي لهُ المجدُ إلى الأبدِ. آمين.
Vespers Gospel
الإنجيل
	John 4:46-53
(يوحنا 4: 46-53)
46 And there was a certain nobleman whose son was sick at Capernaum.
Ⲛⲉ ⲟⲩⲟⲛ ⲟⲩⲃⲁⲥⲓⲗⲓⲕⲟⲥ ⲡⲉ ⲉ̀ⲟⲩⲟⲛ ⲛ̀ⲧⲁϥ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩϣⲏ ⲣⲓ ⲙ̀ⲙⲁⲩ ⲉϥϣⲱⲛⲓ ϧⲉⲛ ⲕⲁⲫⲁⲣⲛⲁⲟⲩⲙ.
46 وَكَانَ فِي كَفْرَنَاحُومَ رَجُلٌ مَلَكِيٌّ لَهُ وَلَدٌ مَرِيضٌ.
47 When he heard that Jesus had come out of Judea into Galilee, he went to Him and implored Him to come down and heal his son, for he was at the point of death.
Ⲫⲁⲓ ⲁϥⲥⲱⲧⲉⲙ ϫⲉ ⲁϥⲓ̀ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ Ⲓⲏ︦ⲥ︦ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ϧⲉⲛ ϯⲓⲟⲩⲇⲉⲁ̀ ⲉ̀ϯⲅⲁⲗⲓⲗⲉⲁ̀ ⲁϥϣⲉ ⲛⲁϥ ϩⲁⲣⲟϥ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛⲁϥϯϩⲟ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟϥ ϩⲓⲛⲁ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉϥⲒ̀ ⲉ̀ϧⲣⲏⲓ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉϥⲧⲟⲩϫⲉ ⲡⲉϥϣⲏⲣⲓ ⲛⲁϥⲛⲁⲙⲟⲩ ⲅⲁⲣ ⲡⲉ.
47 هَذَا إِذْ سَمِعَ أَنَّ يَسُوعَ قَدْ جَاءَ مِنَ الْيَهُودِيَّةِ إِلَى الْجَلِيلِ، انْطَلَقَ إِلَيْهِ وَسَأَلَهُ أَنْ يَنْزِلَ وَيَشْفِيَ ابْنَهُ؛ لِأَنَّهُ كَانَ مُشْرِفًا عَلَى الْمَوْتِ.
48 Then Jesus said to him, “Unless you people see signs and wonders, you will by no means believe.”
Ⲡⲉϫⲉ Ⲓⲏ︦ⲥ︦ ⲟⲩⲛ ⲛⲁϥ ϫⲉ ⲁⲣⲉⲧⲉⲛϣ̀ⲧⲉⲙⲛⲁⲩ ⲉ̀ϩⲁⲛⲙⲏⲓⲛⲓ ⲛⲉⲙ ϩⲁⲛϣ̀ⲫⲏⲣⲓ ⲧⲉⲧⲉⲛⲛⲁϩϯ ⲁⲛ.
48 فَقَالَ لَهُ يَسُوعُ: " لَا تُؤْمِنُونَ إِنْ لَمْ تُعَاينُوا آيَاتٍ وَعَجَائِبَ ".
49 The nobleman said to Him, “Sir, come down before my child dies!”
Ⲡⲉϫⲉ ⲡⲓⲃⲁⲥⲓⲗⲓⲕⲟⲥ ⲛⲁϥ ϫⲉ ⲡⲁⲟ︦ⲥ︦ ⲁ̀ⲙⲟⲩ ⲉ̀ϧ̀ⲣⲏⲓ ⲙ̀ⲡⲁⲧⲉϥⲙⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲡⲁⲁ̀ⲗⲟⲩ.
49 فقَالَ لَهُ الْمَلَكِيُّ: " يَا سَيِّدِي، اِنْزِلْ قَبْلَ أَنْ يَمُوتَ فَتَاي ".
50 Jesus said to him, “Go your way; your son lives.” So the man believed the word that Jesus spoke to him, and he went his way.
Ⲡⲉϫⲉ Ⲓⲏ︦ⲥ︦ ⲛⲁϥ ϫⲉ ⲙⲁϣⲉ ⲛⲁⲕ ϥ̀ⲟⲛϧ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲡⲉⲕϣⲏⲣⲓ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁϥⲛⲁϩϯ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲡⲓⲣⲱⲙⲓ ⲉ̀ⲡⲓⲥⲁϫⲓ ⲉⲧⲁ Ⲓⲏ︦ⲥ︦ ϫⲟϥ ⲛⲁϥ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁϥⲙⲟϣⲓ.
50 قَالَ لَهُ يَسُوعُ: " اِمْضِ. اِبْنُكَ حَيٌّ ". فَآمَنَ الرَّجُلُ بِالْقَوْلِ الَّذِي قَالَهُ لَهُ يَسُوعُ، وَذَهَبَ.
51 And as he was now going down, his servants met him and told him, saying, “Your son lives!”
Ϩⲏⲇⲏ ⲉϥⲛⲏⲟⲩ ⲉ̀ϧ̀ⲣⲏⲓ ⲓⲥ ⲛⲉϥⲉⲃⲓⲁⲓⲕ ⲁⲩⲓ̀ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ⲉ̀ϩ̀ⲣⲁϥ ⲉⲩϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ϫⲉ ϥ̀ⲟⲛϧ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲡⲉⲕϣⲏⲣⲓ.
51 وَفِيمَا هُوَ نَازِلٌ اسْتَقْبَلَهُ عَبِيدُهُ قَائِلِينَ: " إِنَّ ابْنَكَ حَيٌّ ".
52 Then he inquired of them the hour when he got better. And they said to him, “Yesterday at the seventh hour the fever left him.”
Ⲛⲁϥϣⲓⲛⲓ ⲇⲉ ⲛ̀ⲧⲟⲧⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ⲥⲁ ϯⲟⲩⲛⲟⲩ ⲑⲏ ⲉⲧⲁϥⲁ̀ⲥⲓⲁⲓ ⲛ̀ϧⲏⲧⲥ ⲡⲉϫⲱⲟⲩ ⲛⲁϥ ϫⲉ ϧⲉⲛ ⲁϫⲡ ⲍ︦ ⲛ̀ⲥⲁϥ ⲁϥⲭⲁϥ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲡⲓϧ̀ⲙⲟⲙ.
52 فَاسْتَخْبَرَهُمْ عَنِ السَّاعَةِ الَّتِي فِيهَا أَخَذَ يَتَعَافَى، فَقَالُوا لَهُ: " أَمْسِ فِي السَّاعَةِ السَّابِعَةِ تَرَكَتْهُ الْحُمَّى ".
53 So the father knew that it was at the same hour in which Jesus said to him, “Your son lives.” And he himself believed, and his whole household.
Ⲁϥⲉ̀ⲙⲓ ⲟⲩⲛ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲡⲉϥⲓⲱⲧ ϫⲉ ⲛⲉ ϯ ⲟⲩⲛⲟⲩ ⲉ̀ⲧⲉⲙ̀ⲙⲁⲩ ⲧⲉ ⲉⲧⲁ Ⲓⲏ︦ⲥ︦ ϫⲟⲥ ⲛⲁϥ ϫⲉ ϥ̀ⲟⲛϧ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲡⲉⲕϣⲏⲣⲓ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁϥⲛⲁϩϯ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲡⲉϥⲏⲓ ⲧⲏⲣϥ.
53 فَعَلِمَ أَبُوه أَنَّهُ فِي تِلْكَ السَّاعَةِ الَّتِي قَالَ لَهُ فِيهَا يَسُوعُ: " إِنَّ ابْنَكَ حَيٌّ ". فَآمَنَ هُوَ وَبَيْتُهُ كُلُّهُ.