Stand in the fear of God and listen to the Holy Gospel. A reading from the Gospel according to our teacher Saint Luke the Evangelist, and the pure disciple. May his blessings be with us all.
قِفُوا بِخَوْفِ اللهِ، وَأَنْصِتُوا لِسَمَاعِ الإِنْجِيلِ الْمُقَدَّسِ. فَصْلٌ مِنْ بِشَارَةِ الإِنْجِيلِ لِمُعَلِّمِنَا مَارْ لوقا الْبَشِيرِ، التِّلْمِيذِ الطَّاهِرِ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
From the Psalms of our teacher David the prophet. May his blessings be with us all.
مِنْ مَزَامِيرِ تَرَاتِيلِ مُعَلِّمِنَا دَاوُدَ النَّبِيِّ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
Matins Psalm
المزمور
	Psalms 31:11
(مزامير 31: 11)
Many sorrows shall be to the wicked; But he who trusts in the Lord, mercy shall surround him.
Ⲛⲁϣⲱⲟⲩ ⲛⲓⲙⲁⲥⲧⲓⲅⲅⲟⲥ: ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲛⲓⲣⲉϥⲉⲣⲛⲟⲃⲓ: ⲫⲏ ⲇⲉ ⲉ̀ⲧⲁϥⲉⲣϩⲉⲗⲡⲓⲥ ⲉ̀Ⲡⲟ︦ⲥ︦: ⲟⲩⲛⲁⲓ ⲉϥⲉ̀ⲕⲱϯ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟϥ: ⲁ︦ⲭ︦ⲗ.
كَثِيرَةٌ هِيَ ضَرَبَاتُ، الْخُطَاةِ. وَالَّذِي يَتَّكِلُ عَلَى الرَّبِّ، الرَّحْمَةُ تُحِيطُ بِهِ.
People:
Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
الليلويا.
	Psalm Trailer for the Pope or a Bishop
(Ⲙⲁⲣⲟⲩϭⲁⲥϥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲧ̀ⲉⲕⲕ̀ⲗⲏⲥⲓⲁ̀...)
People:
Amen Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲙⲏⲛ Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
امين الليلويا.
Then the introduction to the Gospel is read.
ثم تقال مقدمة الأنجيل وهي:
Reader:
Blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord. Our Lord, God, Savior and King of us all, Jesus Christ, Son of the living God to whom is glory forever. Amen.
القارﺉُ:
مباركٌ الآتي باسمِ الربِّ إلهِ القواتِ، ربُّنا وإلهُنا ومخلصُنا وملكُنا كلِّنا، يسوعُ المسيحُ، ابنُ اللهِ الحيِّ، الذي لهُ المجدُ إلى الأبدِ. آمين.
Matins Gospel
الإنجيل
	Luke 12:54-59
(لوقا 12: 54-59)
54 Then He also said to the multitudes, “Whenever you see a cloud rising out of the west, immediately you say, ‘A shower is coming’; and so it is.
Ⲛⲁϥϫⲱ ⲇⲉ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ⲛ̀ⲛⲓⲕⲉⲙⲏϣ ϫⲉ ϩⲟⲧⲁⲛ ⲁⲣⲉⲧⲉⲛϣⲁⲛⲛⲁⲩ ⲉ̀ⲟⲩϭⲏⲡⲓ ⲉ̀ⲁⲥⲓ̀ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ⲥⲁⲡ̀ⲉⲙⲉⲛⲧ ⲁⲣⲉⲧⲉⲛϫⲟⲥ ⲥⲁⲧⲉⲛ ⲑⲏⲛⲟⲩ ϫⲉ ⲟⲩⲙⲟⲩⲛ̀ϩⲱⲟⲩ ⲉⲑⲛⲏⲟⲩ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ϣⲁⲥϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲙ̀ⲡⲁⲓⲣⲏϯ.
54 وَقَالَ أَيْضًا لِلْجُمُوعِ: " إِذَا رَأَيْتُمْ سَحَابَةً تَطْلَعُ مِنَ الْمَغَارِبِ فَلِلْوَقْتِ تَقُولُونَ: إِنَّهُ يَأْتِي مَطَرٌ. فَيَكُونُ كَذَلِكَ.
55 And when you see the south wind blow, you say, ‘There will be hot weather’; and there is.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ϩⲟⲧⲁⲛ ⲟⲩⲑⲟⲩⲣⲏⲥ ⲉϥⲛⲓϥⲓ ϣⲁⲣⲉⲧⲉⲛϫⲟⲥ ϫⲉ ⲕⲁⲩⲥⲱⲛ ⲡⲉⲑⲛⲁϣⲱⲡⲓ.
55 وَإِذَا رَأَيْتُمْ رِيحَ الْجَنُوبِ تَهُبُّ قُلْتُمْ: سَيَكُونُ حَرٌّ، فَيَكُونُ.
56 Hypocrites! You can discern the face of the sky and of the earth, but how is it you do not discern this time?
Ⲛⲓϣⲟⲃⲓ ⲡ̀ϩⲟ ⲛ̀ⲧ̀ⲫⲉ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲡⲓⲕⲁϩⲓ ⲧⲉⲧⲉⲛⲥⲱⲟⲩⲛ ⲛ̀ⲉⲣⲇⲟⲕⲓⲙⲁⲍⲓⲛ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟϥ ⲡⲁⲓⲥⲏ ⲟⲩ ⲉ ⲛⲑⲟϥ ⲡⲱⲥ ⲧⲉⲧⲉⲛⲥⲱⲟⲩⲛ ⲁⲛ ⲛ̀ⲉⲣⲇⲟⲕⲓⲙⲁⲍⲓⲛ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟϥ.
56 يَا مُرَاؤُونَ! تَعْرِفُونَ أَنْ تُمَيِّزُوا وَجْهَ الْأَرْضِ وَالسَّمَاءِ، فَكَيْفَ لَا تُمَيِّزُونَ هَذَا الزَّمَانَ؟
57 “Yes, and why, even of yourselves, do you not judge what is right?
Ⲉⲑⲃⲉ ⲟⲩ ⲧⲉⲧⲉⲛϯϩⲁⲡ ⲁⲛ ⲛ̀ϯⲙⲉⲑⲙⲏ ⲓ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ϩⲓⲧⲉⲛ ⲑⲏⲛⲟⲩ ⲙ̀ⲙⲁⲩⲁⲧⲉⲛ ⲑⲏⲛⲟⲩ.
57 وَلِمَاذَا لَا تَحْكُمُونَ بِالْعَدْلِ مِنْ تِلْقَاءِ أَنْفُسِكُمْ؟
58 When you go with your adversary to the magistrate, make every effort along the way to settle with him, lest he drag you to the judge, the judge deliver you to the officer, and the officer throw you into prison.
Ϩⲱⲥ ⲅⲁⲣ ⲭ̀ⲛⲁϣⲉ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲡⲉⲕⲁ̀ⲛⲧⲓⲇⲓⲕⲟⲥ ϣⲁ ⲟⲩⲁⲣⲭⲱⲛ ⲙⲟⲓ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩϩⲱⲃ ⲛ̀ⲛⲟⲩϥⲧ ϩⲓ ⲡⲓⲙⲱⲓⲧ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ϩⲁⲣⲟϥ ⲙⲏⲡⲟⲧⲉ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉϥⲥⲟⲕⲕ ϩⲁ ⲡⲓⲣⲉϥϯϩⲁⲡ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲡⲓⲣⲉϥϯ ϩⲁⲡ ⲧⲏⲓⲕ ⲉ̀ⲧⲟⲧϥ ⲙ̀ⲡⲓⲡ̀ⲣⲁⲕⲧⲱⲣ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲡⲓⲡ̀ⲣⲁⲕⲧⲱⲣ ϩⲓⲧⲕ ⲉ̀ⲡⲓϣ̀ⲧⲉⲕⲟ.
58 إِذَا ذَهَبْتَ مَعَ خَصْمِكَ إِلَى الْحَاكِمِ، فَاجْتَهِدْ وَأَنْتَ فِي الطَّرِيقِ أَنْ تَتَخَلَّصَ مِنْهُ، لِئَلَّا يَجُرَّكَ إِلَى الْقَاضِي، فَيُسَلِّمَكَ الْقَاضِي إِلَى الشُّرطِيِّ، وَالشُّرطِيُّ يُلْقِيكَ فِي السِّجْنِ.
59 I tell you, you shall not depart from there till you have paid the very last mite.”
Ϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ⲛⲁⲕ ϫⲉ ⲛ̀ⲛⲉⲕⲓ̀ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ⲙ̀ⲙⲁⲩ ϣⲁⲧⲉⲕϯ ⲙ̀ⲡⲓϧⲁⲉ̀ ⲛ̀ⲗⲉⲡⲧⲟⲛ
59 أَقُولُ لَكَ: إِنَّكَ لَا تَخْرُجُ مِنْ هُنَاكَ حَتَّى تُوفِيَ الْفَلْسَ الْأَخِيرَ ".