Stand in the fear of God and listen to the Holy Gospel. A reading from the Gospel according to our teacher Saint Mark the Evangelist, and the pure disciple. May his blessings be with us all.
قِفُوا بِخَوْفِ اللهِ، وَأَنْصِتُوا لِسَمَاعِ الإِنْجِيلِ الْمُقَدَّسِ. فَصْلٌ مِنْ بِشَارَةِ الإِنْجِيلِ لِمُعَلِّمِنَا مَارْ مرقس الْبَشِيرِ، التِّلْمِيذِ الطَّاهِرِ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
From the Psalms of our teacher David the prophet. May his blessings be with us all.
مِنْ مَزَامِيرِ تَرَاتِيلِ مُعَلِّمِنَا دَاوُدَ النَّبِيِّ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
Vespers Psalm
المزمور
	Psalms 63:7
(مزامير 63: 7)
The righteous shall be glad in the Lord, and trust in Him. And all the upright in heart shall glory.
Ⲉϥⲉ̀ⲟⲩⲛⲟϥ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲡⲓⲑ̀ⲙⲏⲓ ⲉ̀ϫⲉⲛ Ⲡⲟ︦ⲥ︦: ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉϥⲉ̀ⲉⲣϩⲉⲗⲡⲓⲥ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟϥ: ⲉⲩⲉ̀ϣⲟⲩϣⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲟⲩⲟⲛ ⲛⲓⲃⲉⲛ: ⲉⲧⲥⲟⲩⲧⲱⲛ ϧⲉⲛ ⲡⲟⲩϩⲏⲧ. ⲁ︦ⲗ︦.
يَفْرَحُ الصِّدِّيقُ بِالرَّبِّ، وَيَتَّكِلُ عَلَيْهِ، وَيَفْتَخِرُ كُلُّ المُسْتَقِيمِينَ بِقَلْبِهِمْ. هَلِّلُويَا.
People:
Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
الليلويا.
	Psalm Trailer for the Pope or a Bishop
(Ⲙⲁⲣⲟⲩϭⲁⲥϥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲧ̀ⲉⲕⲕ̀ⲗⲏⲥⲓⲁ̀...)
People:
Amen Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲙⲏⲛ Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
امين الليلويا.
Then the introduction to the Gospel is read.
ثم تقال مقدمة الأنجيل وهي:
Reader:
Blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord. Our Lord, God, Savior and King of us all, Jesus Christ, Son of the living God to whom is glory forever. Amen.
القارﺉُ:
مباركٌ الآتي باسمِ الربِّ إلهِ القواتِ، ربُّنا وإلهُنا ومخلصُنا وملكُنا كلِّنا، يسوعُ المسيحُ، ابنُ اللهِ الحيِّ، الذي لهُ المجدُ إلى الأبدِ. آمين.
Vespers Gospel
الإنجيل
	Mark 4:21-25
(مرقس 4: 21-25)
21 Also He said to them, “Is a lamp brought to be put under a basket or under a bed? Is it not to be set on a lampstand?
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛⲁϥϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ⲛⲱⲟⲩ ϫⲉ ⲙⲏⲧⲓ ϣⲁⲩϭⲉⲣⲉ ⲟⲩϧⲏⲃⲥ ϩⲓⲛⲁ ⲛ̀ⲥⲉⲭⲁϥ ϧⲁ ⲡⲓⲙⲉⲛⲧ ⲓⲉ ϧⲁ ⲡⲓϭⲗⲟϫ ⲟⲩⲭⲓ ϩⲓⲛⲁ ⲛ̀ⲥⲉⲭⲁϥ ϩⲓϫⲉⲛ ϯⲗⲩⲭⲛⲓⲁ̀.
21 وَكَانَ يَقُولُ لَهُمْ: " هَلْ يُوقَدُ سِرَاجٌ لِيُوْضَعَ تَحْتَ الْمِكْيَالِ أوْ تَحْتَ السَّرِيرِ؟ ألَيْسَ لِكَيْ يُوضَعَ عَلَى الْمَنَارَةِ؟
22 For there is nothing hidden which will not be revealed, nor has anything been kept secret but that it should come to light.
Ⲟⲩ ⲅⲁⲣ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲛ ⲡⲉⲧϩⲏⲡ ⲁϥϣ̀ⲧⲉⲙⲟⲩⲱⲛϩ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ⲟⲩⲇⲉ ⲙ̀ⲡⲁϥϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲉϥϩⲏⲡ ⲉ̀ⲃⲏⲗ ϫⲉ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉϥⲓ̀ ⲉϥⲟⲩⲱⲛϩ.
22 فَإِنَّهُ لَيْسَ شَيءٌ خَفِيٌّ إِلَّا وَيُظْهَرُ، وَلَا كَانَ مَكْتُومًا إِلَّا وَيُعْلَنُ.
23 If anyone has ears to hear, let him hear.”
Ⲫⲏⲉ̀ⲧⲉ ⲟⲩⲟⲛ ⲙⲁϣϫ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟϥ ⲉ̀ⲥⲱⲧⲉⲙ ⲙⲁⲣⲉϥⲥⲱⲧⲉⲙ.
23 مَنْ لَهُ أُذُنَانِ لِلسَّمْعِ، فَلْيَسْمَعْ ".
24 Then He said to them, “Take heed what you hear. With the same measure you use, it will be measured to you; and to you who hear, more will be given.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛⲁϥϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ⲛⲱⲟⲩ ⲟⲛ ϫⲉ ⲁ̀ⲛⲁⲩ ϫⲉ ⲟⲩ ⲡⲉ ⲧⲉⲧⲉⲛⲥⲱⲧⲉⲙ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟϥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲡⲓϣⲓ ⲉ̀ⲧⲉⲧⲉⲛⲛⲁϣⲓ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟϥ ⲉⲩⲛⲁϣⲓ ⲛⲱⲧⲉⲛ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟϥ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲟⲩⲧⲟⲩϩⲟ ⲛⲱⲧⲉⲛ ϧⲁ ⲛⲏⲉⲧⲥⲱⲧⲉⲙ.
24 وَكَانَ يَقُولُ لَهُمْ أيْضًا: " تَأمَّلُوا مَا تَسْمَعُونَ! بِالْكَيْلِ الَّذِي بِهِ تَكِيلُونَ يُكَالُ لَكُمْ وَيُزَادُ لَكُمْ أيُّهَا السَّامِعُونَ.
25 For whoever has, to him more will be given; but whoever does not have, even what he has will be taken away from him.”
Ⲫⲏ ⲅⲁⲣ ⲉ̀ⲧⲉ ⲟⲩⲟⲛⲧⲁϥ ⲉⲩⲉ̀ϯ ⲛⲁϥ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲫⲏⲉ̀ⲧⲉ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲛⲧⲁϥ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲫⲏⲉ̀ⲧⲉ ⲛ̀ⲧⲟⲧϥ ϣⲁⲩⲟⲗϥ ⲛ̀ⲧⲟⲧϥ.
25 فَإِنَّ مَنْ لَهُ يُعْطَى وَيُزَادُ، وَمَنْ لَيْسَ لَهُ فَالَّذِي عِنْدَهُ يُنْزَعُ مِنْهُ ".