Prophecies
النبوآت
	Proverbs 3:5-18
(أمثال 3: 5-18)
A reading from the Proverbs of Solomon the prophet. May his holy blessings be with us. Amen.
Ⲉⲃⲟⲗϧⲉⲛ ⲛⲓⲡⲁⲣⲟⲓⲙⲓⲁ̀ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ Ⲥⲟⲗⲟⲙⲱⲛ ⲡⲓⲡ̀ⲣⲟⲫⲏⲧⲏⲥ: ⲉ̀ⲣⲉⲡⲉϥⲥ̀ⲙⲟⲩ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ ϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲛⲉⲙⲁⲛ ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ ⲉϥϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ:
من أمثال سليمان النبي بركته المقدسة تكون معنا. آمين.
5 Trust in the Lord with all your heart, And lean not on your own understanding;
5 كُنْ مُتَّكِلًا عَلَى اللَّهِ بِكُلِّ قَلْبِكَ، وَلَا تَتَكَبَّرْ بِحِكْمَتِكَ.
6 In all your ways acknowledge Him, And He shall direct your paths.
6 وَكُلُّ طُرُقِكَ أَظْهِرْهَا، لِكَي تَسْتَقِيمَ سُبُلُكَ وَلَا تَعْثُرَ رِجْلُكَ.
7 Do not be wise in your own eyes; Fear the Lord and depart from evil.
7 لَا تَكُنْ حَكِيمًا فِي عَيْنَيْ نَفْسِكَ. بَلِ اِتَّقِ اللَّهَ وَتَجَنَّبْ كُلَّ شَرٍّ،
8 It will be health to your flesh, And strength to your bones.
8 حِينَئِذٍ يَكُونُ شِفَاءٌ لِجَسَدِكَ، وَصِحَّةٌ لِعِظَامِكَ.
9 Honor the Lord with your possessions, And with the firstfruits of all your increase;
9 أَكْرِمِ اللَّهَ مِنْ أَتْعَابِكَ، وَقَدِّمْ لَهُ الْبُكُورَ مِنْ أَثْمَارِ غَلَّاتِكَ،
10 So your barns will be filled with plenty, And your vats will overflow with new wine.
10 لِكَيْ تَمْتَلِئَ أَهْرَاؤُكَ مِنْ كَثْرَةِ القَمْحِ، وَتَفِيضَ مَعَاصِرُكَ مِنَ الْخَمْرِ.
11 My son, do not despise the chastening of the Lord, Nor detest His correction;
11 يَا ابْنِي، لَا يَصْغُرْ قَلْبُكَ مِنْ تَأْدِيبِ الرَّبِّ، وَلَا تَخُرْ عِنْدَمَا يُوَبِّخُكَ؛
12 For whom the Lord loves He corrects, Just as a father the son in whom he delights.
12 لِأَنَّ مَنْ يُحِبُّهُ الرَّبُّ يُؤدِّبُهُ، وَيَجْلِدُ كُلَّ ابْنٍ يَقْبَلُهُ.
13 Happy is the man who finds wisdom, And the man who gains understanding;
13 طُوبَى لِلْإِنْسَانِ الَّذِي وَجَدَ الْحِكْمَةَ، وَلِلرَّجُلِ الَّذِي نَالَ فَهْمًا؛
14 For her proceeds are better than the profits of silver, And her gain than fine gold.
14 لِأَنَّ الاِتِّجَارَ فِي هَذِهِ أَفْضَلُ مِنْ كُنُوزِ الذَّهَبِ وَالْفِضَّةِ،
15 She is more precious than rubies, And all the things you may desire cannot compare with her.
15 وَأَكْرَمُ مِنَ الْأَحْجَارِ الثَّمِينَةِ، وَكُلُّ نَفَائِسِكَ لَا تُسَاوِيهَا.
16 Length of days is in her right hand, In her left hand riches and honor.
16 فِي يَمِينِهَا طُولُ الْأَيَّامِ، وَفِي يَسَارِهَا الْغِنَى وَالْمَجْدُ.
17 Her ways are ways of pleasantness, And all her paths are peace.
17 طُرُقُهَا طُرُقُ نِعْمَةٍ، وَجَمِيعُ مَسَالِكِهَا سَلَامٌ.
18 She is a tree of life to those who take hold of her, And happy are all who retain her.
18 هِيَ شَجَرَةُ حَيَاةٍ لِلْمُتَعَلِقِّينَ بِهَا، وَمَنِ اسْتَمْسَكَ بِهَا فَلَهُ الطُّوبَى.
Glory be to the Holy Trinity, our God, forever and unto the ages of all ages. Amen.
Ⲟⲩⲱ̀ⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ϯⲧ̀ⲣⲓⲁⲥ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ Ⲡⲉⲛⲛⲟⲩϯ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛⲉⲙ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲛⲓⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲧⲏⲣⲟⲩ: ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ.
مجداً للثالوث القدوس إلهنا الى أبد الآبدين كلها آمين.
	Isaiah 37:33-38:6
(اشعياء 37: 33-38: 6)
A reading from Isaiah, the prophet. May his holy blessings be with us. Amen.
Ⲉⲃⲟⲗϧⲉⲛ Ⲏⲥⲁⲏ̀ⲁⲥ ⲡⲓⲡ̀ⲣⲟⲫⲏⲧⲏⲥ: ⲉ̀ⲣⲉⲡⲉϥⲥ̀ⲙⲟⲩ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ ϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲛⲉⲙⲁⲛ ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ ⲉϥϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ:
من اشعياء النبي بركته المقدسة تكون معنا. آمين.
33 “Therefore thus says the Lord concerning the king of Assyria: ‘He shall not come into this city, Nor shoot an arrow there, Nor come before it with shield, Nor build a siege mound against it.
33 لِذَلِكَ هَكَذَا يَقُولُ الرَّبُّ عَلَى مَلِكِ أَشُّورَ: إِنَّهُ لَا يَدْخُلُ هَذِهِ الْمَدِينَةَ، وَلَا يَرْمِي إِلَيْهَا سَهْمًا، وَلَا يَتَقَدَّمُ عَلَيْهَا بِتُرْسٍ، وَلَا يَنْصُبُ عَلَيْهَا مِتْرَسَةً،
34 By the way that he came, By the same shall he return; And he shall not come into this city,’ Says the Lord.
34 لَكِنْ فِي الطَّرِيقِ الَّتِي جَاءَ مِنْهَا يَرْجِعُ، وَإِلَى هَذِهِ الْمَدِينَةِ لَا يَدْخُلُ، يَقُولُ الرَّبُّ.
35 ‘For I will defend this city, to save it For My own sake and for My servant David’s sake.’”
35 فَأَحْمِي هَذِهِ الْمَدِينَةَ وَأُخَلِّصُهَا مِنْ أَجْلِي، وَمِنْ أَجْلِ دَاوُدَ عَبْدِي.
36 Then the angel of the Lord went out, and killed in the camp of the Assyrians one hundred and eighty-five thousand; and when people arose early in the morning, there were the corpses—all dead.
36 وَخَرَجَ مَلَاكُ الرَّبِّ وَقَتَلَ مِنْ جَيْشِ أَشُّورَ مِئَةَ أَلْفٍ وَخَمْسَةً وَثَمَانِينَ أَلْفًا، فَلَمَّا بَكَّرُوا صَبَاحًا إِذَا هُمْ جَمِيعًا جُثَثُ أَمْوَاتٍ.
37 So Sennacherib king of Assyria departed and went away, returned home, and remained at Nineveh.
37 فَارْتَحَلَ سَنْحَارِيبُ مَلِكُ أَشُّورَ وَمَضَى رَاجِعًا وَأَقَامَ بِنِينَوَى.
38 Now it came to pass, as he was worshiping in the house of Nisroch his god, that his sons Adrammelech and Sharezer struck him down with the sword; and they escaped into the land of Ararat. Then Esarhaddon his son reigned in his place.
38 وَفِيمَا هُوَ سَاجِدٌ فِي بَيْتِ نِصْرُوخَ إِلَهِهِ قَتَلَهُ أَدْرَمَّلَكُ وَشَرْآصَرُ ابْنَاهُ بِالسَّيْفِ، وَهَرَبَا إِلَى أَرْضِ أَرَارَاطَ. وَمَلَكَ آسَرْحَدُّونُ اِبْنُهُ مَكَانَهُ.
1 In those days Hezekiah was sick and near death. And Isaiah the prophet, the son of Amoz, went to him and said to him, “Thus says the Lord: ‘Set your house in order, for you shall die and not live.’”
1 فِي تِلْكَ الْأَيَّامِ مَرِضَ حَزَقِيَّا مَرَضَ الْمَوْتِ، فَوَافَاهُ إِشَعْيَاء بنُ آمُوصَ النَّبِيُّ وَقَالَ لَهُ: " هَكَذَا يَقُولُ الرَّبُّ: أَوْصِ بَيْتَكَ لِأَنَّكَ تَمُوتُ وَلَا تَعِيشُ ".
2 Then Hezekiah turned his face toward the wall, and prayed to the Lord,
2 فَحَوَّلَ حَزَقِيَّا وَجْهَهُ إِلَى الْحَائِطِ وَصَلَّى إِلَى الرَّبِّ. وَقَالَ:
3 and said, “Remember now, O Lord, I pray, how I have walked before You in truth and with a loyal heart, and have done what is good in Your sight.” And Hezekiah wept bitterly.
3 " آهِ يَا رَبُّ، اذْكُرْ كَيْفَ سَلَكْتُ أَمَامَكَ بِالْحَقِّ وَسَلَامَةِ الْقَلْبِ وَكَيْفَ صَنَعْتُ الْخَيْرَ أَمَامَكَ ". وَبَكَى حَزَقِيَّا بُكَاءً شَدِيدًا.
4 And the word of the Lord came to Isaiah, saying,
4 فَصَارَ كَلَامُ الرَّبِّ إِلَى إِشَعْيَاءَ قَائِلًا:
5 “Go and tell Hezekiah, ‘Thus says the Lord, the God of David your father: “I have heard your prayer, I have seen your tears; surely I will add to your days fifteen years.
5 " اِذْهَبْ وَقُلْ لِحَزَقِيَّا: هَكَذَا قَالَ الرَّبُّ إِلَهُ دَاوُدَ أَبِيكَ: إِنِّي قَدْ سَمِعْتُ صَلَاتَكَ. وَرَأَيْتُ دُمُوعَكَ. وَهَأَنَذَا أَزِيدُكَ عَلَى أَيَّامِكَ خَمْسَ عَشْرَةَ سَنَةً.
6 I will deliver you and this city from the hand of the king of Assyria, and I will defend this city.”’
6 وَأُنْقِذُكَ مِنْ يَدِ مَلَكِ أَشُّورَ أَنْتَ وَهَذِهِ الْمَدِينَةَ، وَأُحَامِي عَنْ هَذِهِ الْمَدِينَةِ ".
Glory be to the Holy Trinity, our God, forever and unto the ages of all ages. Amen.
Ⲟⲩⲱ̀ⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ϯⲧ̀ⲣⲓⲁⲥ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ Ⲡⲉⲛⲛⲟⲩϯ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛⲉⲙ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲛⲓⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲧⲏⲣⲟⲩ: ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ.
مجداً للثالوث القدوس إلهنا الى أبد الآبدين كلها آمين.
	Job 22:1-30
(ايوب 22: 1-30)
A reading from Job the righteous. May his holy blessings be with us. Amen.
Ⲉⲃⲟⲗϧⲉⲛ Ⲓⲱⲃ Ⲡⲓⲑ̀ⲙⲏⲓ: ⲉ̀ⲣⲉⲡⲉϥⲥ̀ⲙⲟⲩ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ ϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲛⲉⲙⲁⲛ ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ ⲉϥϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ:
من ايوب الصديق بركته المقدسة تكون معنا. آمين.
1 Then Eliphaz the Temanite answered and said:
1 فَأَجَابَ أَلِيفَازُ التَّيْمَانِيُّ وَقَالَ:
2 “Can a man be profitable to God, Though he who is wise may be profitable to himself?
2 أَلَعَلَّ الْإِنْسَانَ يَنْفَعُ اللَّهَ؟ إِنَّمَا يَنْفَعُ الْحَكِيمُ نَفْسَهُ.
3 Is it any pleasure to the Almighty that you are righteous? Or is it gain to Him that you make your ways blameless?
3 هَلْ مِنْ بُغْيَةٍ لِلْقَدِيرِ أَنْ تَكُونَ بَارًّا، أَوْ مِنْ نَفْعٍ لَهُ أَنْ تُزْكِّيَ طُرُقَكَ؟
4 “Is it because of your fear of Him that He corrects you, And enters into judgment with you?
4 أَمِنْ أَجْلِ هَيْبَتِكَ يُحَاجُّكَ، أَوْ يُنَافِذُكَ إِلَى الْقَضَاءِ؟
5 Is not your wickedness great, And your iniquity without end?
5 أَلَيْسَ شَرُّكَ جَسِيمًا، وَآثَامُكَ لَا حَدَّ لَهَا؟
6 For you have taken pledges from your brother for no reason, And stripped the naked of their clothing.
6 فَإِنَّكَ ارْتَهَنْتَ مِنْ أَخِيكَ بِغَيْرِ حَقٍّ، وَسَلَبْتَ الْعُرَاةَ ثِيَابَهُمْ.
7 You have not given the weary water to drink, And you have withheld bread from the hungry.
7 َلَمْ تَسْقِ الْعَطْشَانَ مَاءً، وَمَنَعْتَ الْجَائِعَ خُبْزَكَ.
8 But the mighty man possessed the land, And the honorable man dwelt in it.
8 فَأَصَبَحَتِ الْأَرْضُ لِذي الذِّرَاعِ، وَمَرْفُوعُ الْجَاهِ اسْتَحْوَذَ عَلَيْهَا.
9 You have sent widows away empty, And the strength of the fatherless was crushed.
9 أَرْسَلْتَ الْأَرَامِلَ فَارِغَاتٍ، وَأَذْرُعُ الْيَتَامَى حُطِّمَتْ.
10 Therefore snares are all around you, And sudden fear troubles you,
10 لِذَلِكَ تُحَدِّقُ بِكَ الْفِخَاخُ، وَيُرَوِّعُكَ رُعْبٌ مُفَاجِئٌ،
11 Or darkness so that you cannot see; And an abundance of water covers you.
11 أَوْ ظُلْمَةٌ لَا تُبْصِرُ فِيهَا، أَوْ غَمْرُ مَاءٍ يَعْلُوكَ.
12 “Is not God in the height of heaven? And see the highest stars, how lofty they are!
12 أَلَيْسَ اللَّهُ فَوْقَ أَعْلَى السَّمَاوَاتِ؟ اُنْظُرْ ذُرْوَةَ الْكَوَاكِبِ مَا أَعْلَاهَا!
13 And you say, ‘What does God know? Can He judge through the deep darkness?
13 وَقَدْ قُلْتَ: " مَاذَا يَعْلَمُ اللَّهُ؟! أَمِنْ وَرَاءِ الضَّبَابِ يَدِينُ؟!
14 Thick clouds cover Him, so that He cannot see, And He walks above the circle of heaven.’
14 السَّحَابُ سِتْرٌ لَهُ فَلَا يَرَى، وَعَلَى قُبَّةِ السَّمَاوَاتِ يَتَخَطَّى ".
15 Will you keep to the old way Which wicked men have trod,
15 أَلَعَلَّكَ تَلْزَمُ مَسْلَكَ الْقَدَمِ الَّذِي وَطِئَهُ أَصْحَابُ الْإِثْمِ؟
16 Who were cut down before their time, Whose foundations were swept away by a flood?
16 الَّذِينَ قُرِضُوا قَبْلَ أَوَانِهِمْ. وَانْدَفَقَ السَّيْلُ عَلَى أَسَاسِهِمْ.
17 They said to God, ‘Depart from us! What can the Almighty do to them?’
17 الْقَائِلِينَ لِلَّهِ: اُبْعُدْ عَنَّا. وَمَاذَا يَصْنَعُ بِنَا الْقَدِيرُ؟
18 Yet He filled their houses with good things; But the counsel of the wicked is far from me.
18 وَهُوَ قَدْ أَفْعَمَ بُيُوتَهُمْ طَيِّبَاتٍ. فَبُعْدًا لِمَشُورَةِ الْمُنَافِقِينَ.
19 “The righteous see it and are glad, And the innocent laugh at them:
19 يَنْظُرُ الصَّدِّيقُونَ فَيَفْرَحُونَ. وَالزَّكِيُّ يَسْتَهْزِئُ بِهِمْ. قَائِلِينَ:
20 ‘Surely our adversaries are cut down, And the fire consumes their remnant.’
20 أَلَمْ يَنْقَرِضُ مُقَاوِمُونَا، وَقَدْ أَكَلَتْ بَقِيَّتَهُمُ النَّارُ؟
21 “Now acquaint yourself with Him, and be at peace; Thereby good will come to you.
21 فَتَقَرَّبْ إِلَيْهِ وَصَالِحْهُ. فَبِذَلِكَ تَعُودُ إِلَيْكَ الطَّيِّبَاتُ.
22 Receive, please, instruction from His mouth, And lay up His words in your heart.
22 وَتَلَقَّ الشَّرِيعَةَ مِنْ فِيهِ، وَأَوْدِعْ أَقْوَالَهُ فِي قَلْبِكَ.
23 If you return to the Almighty, you will be built up; You will remove iniquity far from your tents.
23 فَإِنَّكَ إِنْ تُبْتَ إِلَى الْقَدِيرِ يُعَادُ عُمْرَانُكَ، وَتَنْفِي الْإِثْمَ عَنْ أَخْبِيَتِكَ.
24 Then you will lay your gold in the dust, And the gold of Ophir among the stones of the brooks.
24 فَتَجْعَلُ التِّبْرَ مَكَانَ التُّرَابِ، وَسَبَائِكَ مَكَانَ حَصَى الْأَوْدِيَةِ.
25 Yes, the Almighty will be your gold And your precious silver;
25 وَيَكُونُ الْقَدِيرُ تِبْرَكَ وَكُنُوزَ فِضَّةٍ لَكَ.
26 For then you will have your delight in the Almighty, And lift up your face to God.
26 حِينَئِذٍ تَكُونُ لَذَّتُكَ فِي الْقَدِيرِ وَتَرْفَعُ إِلَى اللَّهِ وَجْهَكَ.
27 You will make your prayer to Him, He will hear you, And you will pay your vows.
27 وَتَدْعُو إِلَيْهِ فَيُجِيبُكَ، وَتُوفِي بِنُذُورِكَ.
28 You will also declare a thing, And it will be established for you; So light will shine on your ways.
28 وَتَعْزِمُ أَمْرًا فَيَسْتَتِبُّ لَكَ، وَعَلَى سُبُلِكَ يُشْرِقُ نُورٌ.
29 When they cast you down, and you say, ‘Exaltation will come!’ Then He will save the humble person.
29 وَمَنِ اتَّضَعَ تَقُولُ لَهُ: ارْتَفِعْ. فَيُخَلِّصُ اللَّهُ الْخَاشِعَ الطَّرْفِ.
30 He will even deliver one who is not innocent; Yes, he will be delivered by the purity of your hands.”
30 وَيُنَجِّي مَنْ لَيْسَ بِزَكِيٍّ فَيَنْجُو بِبِرِّ كَفَّيْكَ.
Glory be to the Holy Trinity, our God, forever and unto the ages of all ages. Amen.
Ⲟⲩⲱ̀ⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ϯⲧ̀ⲣⲓⲁⲥ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ Ⲡⲉⲛⲛⲟⲩϯ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛⲉⲙ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲛⲓⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲧⲏⲣⲟⲩ: ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ.
مجداً للثالوث القدوس إلهنا الى أبد الآبدين كلها آمين.