Prophecies
النبوآت
	Genesis 18:17-19:29
(تكوين 18: 17-19: 29)
A reading from the Book of Genesis of Moses the prophet. May his holy blessings be with us. Amen.
Ⲉⲃⲟⲗϧⲉⲛ Ⲡϫⲟⲙ ⲛ̀Ϯⲅⲉⲛⲉⲥⲓⲥ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ Ⲙⲱⲩ̀ⲥⲏⲥ ⲡⲓⲡ̀ⲣⲟⲫⲏⲧⲏⲥ: ⲉ̀ⲣⲉⲡⲉϥⲥ̀ⲙⲟⲩ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ ϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲛⲉⲙⲁⲛ ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ ⲉϥϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ:
من سفر تكوين لموسى النبي بركته المقدسة تكون معنا. آمين.
17 And the Lord said, Shall I hide from Abraam my servant what things I intend to do?
17 فَقَالَ الرَّبُّ: " هَلْ أُخْفِي مَا أَنَا فَاعِلُهُ عَنْ عَبْدِي إِبْرَاهِيمَ،
18 But Abraam shall become a great and populous nation, and in him shall all the nations of the earth be blessed.
18 وَإِبْرَاهِيمُ يَكُونُ أُمَّةً عَظِيمَةً وَكَثِيرَةً، وَتَتَبَارَكُ بِهِ جَمِيعُ أُمَمِ الْأَرْضِ؟
19 For I know that he will order his sons, and his house after him, and they will keep the ways of the Lord, to do justice and judgment, that the Lord may bring upon Abraam all things whatsoever he has spoken to him.
19 لِأَنِّي عَلِمْتُ أَنَّهُ يُوصِي بَنِيهِ وَبَيْتَهُ مِنْ بَعْدِهِ فَيَحْفَظُونَ طُرُقَ الرَّبِّ، لِيَعْمَلُوا بِرًّا وَعَدْلًا، لِكَيْ يَعْمَلَ الرَّبُّ لِإِبْرَاهِيمَ بِمَا تَكَلَّمَ بِهِ مَعَهُ ".
20 And the Lord said, The cry of Sodom and Gomorrha has been increased towards me, and their sins are very great.
20 وَقَالَ الرَّبُّ: " إِنَّ صُرَاخَ سَدُومَ وَعَمُورَةَ قَدْ كَثُرَ، وَخَطَايَاهُمْ عَظِيمَةٌ جِدًّا.
21 I will therefore go down and see, if they completely correspond with the cry which comes to me, and if not, that I may know.
21 إِنِّي أَنْزِلُ لِأَعْرِفَ هَلْ صُرَاخُهَا الْآتِي إِلَيَّ قَدْ كَمُلَ أَمْ لَا ".
22 And the men having departed from there, came to Sodom; and Abraam was still standing before the Lord.
22 وَانْصَرَفَ الرِّجَالُ مِنْ هُنَاكَ وَذَهَبُوا نَحْوَ سَدُومَ، وَأَمَّا إِبْرَاهِيمُ فَكَانَ لَمْ يَزَلْ وَاقِفًا أَمَامَ الرَّبِّ.
23 And Abraam drew close and said, Would You destroy the righteous with the wicked, and shall the righteous be as the wicked?
23 فَاقْتَرَبَ إِبْرَاهِيمُ وَقَالَ لِلرَّبِّ: أَتُهْلِكُ الْبَارَّ مَعَ الْأَثِيمِ؟ أَفَيَكُونُ الصِّدِّيقُ مِثْلَ الْمُنَافِقِ؟
24 Should there be fifty righteous in the city, will You destroy them? will You not spare the whole place for the sake of the fifty righteous, if they be in it?
24 إِنْ وُجِدَ خَمْسُونَ بَارًّا فِي الْمَدِينَةِ، أَفَتُهْلِكُهَا وَلَا تَصْفَحُ عَنْهَا مِنْ أَجْلِ الْخَمْسِينَ الَّذِينَ فِيهَا؟
25 By no means shall You do as this thing [is] so as to destroy the righteous with the wicked, so the righteous shall be as the wicked: by no means. You that judge the whole earth, shalt You not do right?
25 حَاشَا لَكَ أَنْ تَصْنَعَ مِثْلَ هَذَا: أَنْ تُهْلِكَ الْبَارَّ مَعَ الْأَثِيمِ، فَيَكُونُ الْبَارُّ كَالْأَثِيمِ. حَاشَا لَكَ! أَدَيَّانُ كُلِّ الْأَرْضِ لَا يَدِينُ بِالْعَدْلِ؟
26 And the Lord said, If there should be in Sodom fifty righteous in the city, I will spare the whole city, and the whole place for their sakes.
26 فَقَالَ الرَّبُّ: إِنْ وَجَدْتُ فِي سَدُومَ خَمْسِينَ بَارًّا فِي الْمَدِينَةِ، فَإِنِّي أَصْفَحُ عَنِ الْمَكَانِ كُلِّهِ مِنْ أَجْلِهِمْ.
27 And Abraam answered and said, Now I have begun to speak to my Lord, and I am earth and ashes.
27 فَأَجَابَ إِبْرَاهِيمُ: هَأَنَذَا قَدْ طَفِقْتُ أَتَكَلَّمُ أَمَامَ سَيِّدِي، وَأَنَا تُرَابٌ وَرَمَادٌ.
28 But if the fifty righteous should be diminished to forty-five, will You destroy the whole city because of the five [wanting]? And he said, I will not destroy it, if I should find there forty-five.
28 إِنْ نَقَصَ الْخَمْسُونَ بَارًّا خَمْسَةً، أَفَتُهْلِكُ جَمِيعَ الْمَدِينَةِ بِالْخَمْسَةِ؟ فَقَالَ: لَا أُهْلِكُهَا، إِنْ وَجَدْتُ هُنَاكَ خَمْسَةً وَأَرْبَعِينَ.
29 And he continued to speak to him still, and said, But if there should be found there forty? And he said, I will not destroy it for the forty's sake.
29 ثُمَّ عَادَ أَيْضًا وَكَلَّمَهُ فَقَالَ: إِنْ وُجِدَ هُنَاكَ أَرْبَعُونَ. فَقَالَ: لَا أَفْعَلُ مِنْ أَجْلِ الْأَرْبَعِينَ.
30 And he said, Will there be anything [against me], Lord, if I shall speak? but if there be found there thirty? And he said, I will not destroy it for the thirty's sake.
30 فَقَالَ لَا يَثْقُلُ أَمَامَ سَيِّدِي أَنْ أَتَكَلَّمَ. إِنْ وُجِدَ هُنَاكَ ثَلَاثُونَ. فَقَالَ: لَا أَفْعَلُ، إِنْ وَجَدْتُ هُنَاكَ ثَلَاثِينَ.
31 And he said, Since I am able to speak to the Lord, what if there should be found there twenty? And he said, I will not destroy it, if I should find there twenty.
31 قَالَ: قَدِ اِسْتَرْسَلْتُ فِي الْكَلَامِ أَمَامَ سَيِّدِي. إِنْ وُجِدَ هُنَاكَ عِشْرُونَ. قَالَ: لَا أَهْلِكُهُمْ مِنْ أَجْلِ الْعِشْرِينَ.
32 And he said, Will there be anything [against me], Lord, if I speak yet once? but if there should be found there ten? And he said, I will not destroy it for the ten's sake.
32 فَقَالَ: لَا يَثْقُلُ لَدَى سَيِّدِي أَنْ أَتَكَلَّمَ هَذِهِ الْمَرَّةَ فَقَطْ. إِنْ وُجِدَ هُنَاكَ عَشَرَةٌ. قَالَ: لَا أُهْلِكُهُمْ مِنْ أَجْلِ الْعَشَرَةِ.
33 And the Lord departed, when he left off speaking to Abraam, and Abraam returned to his place.
33 وَمَضَى الرَّبُّ عِنْدَمَا فَرَغَ مِنَ الْكَلَامِ مَعَ إِبْرَاهِيمَ، وَرَجَعَ إِبْرَاهِيمُ إِلَى مَوْضِعِهِ.
1 And the two angels came to Sodom at evening. And Lot sat by the gate of Sodom, and Lot having seen them, rose up to meet them, and he worshipped with his face to the ground, and said
1 فَجَاءَ الْمَلَاكَانِ إِلَى سَدُومَ مَسَاءً، وَكَانَ لُوْطٌ جَالِسًا بِبَابِ سَدُومَ. فَلَمَّا رَآهُمَا لُوْطٌ قَامَ لِلِقَائِهِمَا، وَسَجَدَ بِوَجْهِهِ إِلَى الْأَرْضِ، وَقَالَ:
2 Lo! [my] lords, turn aside to the house of your servant, and rest from your journey, and wash your feet, and having risen early in the morning you shall depart on your journey. And they said, No, but we will lodge in the street.
2 يَا سَيِّدِيَّ، مِيلَا إِلَى بَيْتِ عَبْدِكُمَا وَبِيتَا وَاغْسِلَا أَرْجُلَكُمَا، ثُمَّ تُبَكِّرَانِ وَتَمْضِيَانِ فِي سَبِيلِكُمَا. فَقَالَا: لَا، بَلْ فِي السَّاحَةِ نَبِيتُ.
3 And he constrained them, and they turned aside to him, and they entered into his house, and he made a feast for them, and baked unleavened cakes for them, and they did eat.
3 فَأَلَحَّ عَلَيْهِمَا جِدًّا، فَمَالَا إِلَيْهِ وَدَخَلَا مَنْزِلَهُ. فَصَنَعَ لَهُمَا مَأْدُبَةً وَخَبَزَ فَطِيرًا، فَأَكَلَا.
4 But before they went to sleep, the men of the city, the Sodomites, compassed the house, both young and old, all the people together.
4 وَقَبْلَ أَنْ يَضْطَجِعَا، إِذَا أَهْلُ الْمَدِينَةِ، أَهْلُ سَدُومَ، قَدْ أَحَاطُوا بِالْبَيْتِ، مِنَ الصَّبِيِّ إِلَى الشَّيْخِ، جَمِيعُ الْقَوْمِ إِلَى آخِرِهِمْ.
5 And they called out Lot, and said to him, Where are the men that went in to you this night? bring them out to us that we may be with them.
5 فَنَادَوْا لُوطًا وَقَالُوا لَهُ: أَيْنَ الرَّجُلَانِ اللَّذَانِ قَدِمَا إِلَيْكَ فِي هَذِهِ اللَّيْلَةِ؟ أَخْرِجْهُمَا إِلَيْنَا حَتَّى نَعْرِفَهُمَا.
6 And Lot went out to them to the porch, and he shut the door after him,
6 فَخَرَجَ إِلَيْهِمْ لُوطٌ إِلَى الْبَابِ وَأَغْلَقَ الْبَابَ وَرَاءَهُ.
7 And said to them, By no means, brethren, do not act villainously.
7 وَقَالَ: لَا تَفْعَلُوا شَرًّا يَا إِخْوَتِي.
8 But I have two daughters, who have not known a man. I will bring them out to you, and do use them as it may please you, only do not injury to these men, to avoid which they came under the shelter of my roof.
8 هَأَنَذَا لِيَ ابْنَتَانِ مَا عَرَفَتَا رَجُلًا: أُخْرِجُهُمَا إِلَيْكُمْ، فَاصْنَعُوا بِهِمَا مَا حَسُنَ عِنْدَكُمْ. وَأَمَّا هَذَانِ الرَّجُلَانِ، فَلَا تَفْعَلُوا بِهِمَا شَيْئًا، لِأَنَّهُمَا دَخَلَا تَحْتَ ظِلِّ سَقْفِي.
9 And they said to him, Stand back there, you came in to sojourn, was it also to judge? Now then we would harm you more than them. And they pressed hard on the man, even Lot, and they drew close to break the door.
9 فَقَالُوا: تَنَحَّ مِنْ هُنَا. ثُمَّ قَالُوا: أَيَأْتِي رَجُلٌ يَنْزِلُ بِنَا وَيَحْكُمُ عَلَيْنَا؟! الْآنَ نَفْعَلُ بِكَ أَسْوَأَ مِمَّا نَفْعَلُ بِهِمَا. وَأَلَحُّوا عَلَى لُوطٍ جِدًّا وَتَقَدَّمُوا لِيَكْسِرُوا الْبَابَ.
10 And the men stretched forth their hands and drew Lot in to them into the house, and shut the door of the house.
10 فَمَدَّ الرَّجُلَانِ أَيْدِيَهُمَا وَأَدْخَلَا لُوطًا إِلَيْهِمَا إِلَى الْبَيْتِ وَأَغْلَقَا الْبَابَ.
11 And they smote the men that were at the door of the house with blindness, both small and great, and they were wearied with seeking the door.
11 وَأَمَّا الْقَوْمُ الَّذِينَ عَلَى بَابِ الْبَيْتِ فَضَرَبَاهُمْ بِالْعَمَى، مِنْ صَغِيرِهِمْ إِلَى كَبِيرِهِمْ، فَعَجَزُوا عَنْ أَنْ يَجِدُوا الْبَابَ.
12 And the men said to Lot, Have you here sons-in-law, or sons or daughters, or if you have any other friend in the city, bring them out of this place.
12 وَقَالَ الرَّجُلَانِ لِلُوطٍ: مَنْ لَكَ أَيْضًا هَهُنَا؟ أَصْهَارَكَ وَبَنِيكَ وَبَنَاتِكَ وَجَمِيعَ مَنْ لَكَ فِي الْمَدِينَةِ، أَخْرِجْهُمْ مِنْ هَذَا الْمَوْضِعِ،
13 For we are going to destroy this place; for their cry has been raised up before the Lord, and the Lord has sent us to destroy it.
13 فَإِنَّنَا مُهْلِكَانِ هَذَا الْمَوْضِعَ، إِذْ قَدْ عَظُمَ صُرَاخُهُمْ أَمَامَ الرَّبِّ، وَقَدْ بَعَثْنَا إِلَيْكَ لِنُهْلِكَ الْمَدِينَةَ.
14 And Lot went out, and spoke to his sons-in-law who had married his daughters, and said, Rise up, and depart out of this place, for the Lord is about to destroy the city; but he seemed to be speaking absurdly before his sons-in-law.
14 فَخَرَجَ لُوطٌ وَكَلَّمَ أَصْهَارَهُ مُتَّخِذِي بَنَاتِهِ وَقَالَ لَهُمْ: قُومُوا وَاخْرُجُوا مِنْ هَذَا الْمَوْضِعِ، لِأَنَّ الرَّبَّ مُهْلِكٌ الْمَدِينَةَ. فَكَانَ كَمَازِحٍ فِي أَعْيُنِ أَصْهَارِهِ.
15 But when it was morning, the angels hastened Lot, saying, Arise and take your wife, and your two daughters whom you have, and go forth; lest you also be destroyed with the iniquities of the city.
15 وَعِنْدَ طُلُوعِ الْفَجْرِ، أَلَحَّ الْمَلَاكَانِ عَلَى لُوطٍ قَائِلَيْنَ: قُمْ فَخُذِ اِمْرَأَتَكَ وَابْنَتَيْكَ الْمَوْجُودَتَيْنِ لِئَلَّا تَهْلِكَ بِإِثْمِ الْمَدِينَةِ.
16 And they were troubled, and the angels laid hold on his hand, and the hand of his wife, and the hands of his two daughters, in that the Lord spared him.
16 فَتَوَانَى لُوطٌ، فَأَمْسَكَ الرَّجُلَانِ بِيَدِهِ وَبِيَدِ اِمْرَأَتِهِ وَابْنَتَيْهِ، لِشَفَقَةِ الرَّبِّ عَلَيْهِ،
17 And it came to pass when they brought them out, that they said, Save your own life by all means; look not round to that which is behind, nor stay in all the country round about, escape to the mountain, lest perhaps you be overtaken together with them.
17 وَأَخْرَجَاهُ وَصَيَّرَاهُ خَارِجَ الْمَدِينَةِ. فَلَمَّا أَخْرَجَاهُمْ إِلَى خَارِجٍ قَالَا لَهُ: اُنْجُ بِنَفْسِكَ، لَا تَلْتَفِتْ إِلَى وَرَائِكَ، وَلَا تَقِفْ فِي الْبُقْعَةِ كُلِّهَا، وَاهْرُبْ إِلَى الْجَبَلِ لِئَلَّا تَهْلِكَ.
18 And Lot said to them, I pray, Lord,
18 فَقَالَ لَهُمَا لُوطٌ: لَا يَا سَيِّدِي.
19 Since your servant has found mercy before you, and you have magnified your righteousness, in what you do towards me that my soul may live,-- but I shall not be able to escape to the mountain, lest perhaps the calamity overtake me and I die.
19 إِنَّ عَبْدَكَ قَدْ نَالَ حُظْوَةً فِي عَيْنَيْكَ، وَعَظُمَتْ رَحْمَتُكَ الَّتِي صَنَعْتَهَا إِلَيَّ بِإِحْيَاءِ نَفْسِي. إِنِّي لَا أَسْتَطِيعُ التَّخَلُّصَ إِلَى الْجَبَلِ فَرُبَّمَا أَدْرَكَنِيَ الشَّرُّ فَأَمُوتُ.
20 Behold this city is near for me to escape there, which is a small one, and there shall I be preserved, is it not little? and my soul shall live because of you.
20 هَا إِنَّ هَذِهِ الْمَدِينَةَ قَرِيبَةٌ لِلْهَرَبِ إِلَيْهَا وَهِيَ صَغِيرَةٌ، دَعْنِي أَهْرُبُ إِلَيْهَا. إِنَّمَا هِيَ صَغِيرَةٌ فَتَحْيَا نَفْسِي.
21 And he said to him, Behold, I have had respect to you also about this thing, that I should not overthrow the city about which you have spoken.
21 فَقَالَ لَهُ: هَأَنَذَا قَدْ شَفَّعْتُكَ فِي هَذَا الْأَمْرِ أَيْضًا، بِأَنْ لَا أَقْلِبَ الْمَدِينَةَ الَّتِي تَكَلَّمْتَ عَنْهَا.
22 Hasten therefore to escape there, for I shall not be able to do anything until you come there; therefore he called the name of that city, Segor.
22 أَسْرِعْ بِالتَّخَلُّصِ إِلَى هُنَاكَ، فَإِنِّي لَا أَسْتَطِيعُ أَنْ أَصْنَعَ شَيْئًا إِلَى أَنْ تَصِيرَ إِلَيْهَا. لِذَلِكَ دُعِيَ اسْمُ الْمَدِينَةِ صُوغَرَ.
23 The sun was risen upon the earth, when Lot entered into Segor.
23 وَإِذْ أَشْرَقَتِ الشَّمْسُ عَلَى الْأَرْضِ، دَخَلَ لُوطٌ صُوغَرَ.
24 And the Lord rained on Sodom and Gomorrha brimstone and fire from the Lord out of heaven.
24 وَأَمْطَرَ الرَّبُّ عَلَى سَدُومَ وَعَمُورَةَ كِبْرِيتًا وَنَارًا مِنْ عِنْدِ الرَّبِّ مِنَ السَّمَاءِ.
25 And he overthrew these cities, and all the country round about, and all that dwelt in the cities, and the plants springing out of the ground.
25 وَقَلَبَ تِلْكَ الْمُدُنَ، وَكُلَّ الْبُقْعَةِ، وَجَمِيعَ سُكَّانِ الْمُدُنِ، وَنَبَاتَ الْأَرْضِ.
26 And his wife looked back, and she became a pillar of salt.
26 فَالْتَفَتَتْ اِمْرَأَتُهُ إِلَى وَرَائِهَا فَصَارَتْ عَمُودَ مِلْحٍ.
27 And Abraam rose up early to go to the place, where he had stood before the Lord.
27 فَبَكَّرَ إِبْرَاهِيمُ فِي الْغَدِ إِلَى الْمَوْضِعِ الَّذِي وَقَفَ فِيهِ أَمَامَ الرَّبِّ،
28 And he looked towards Sodom and Gomorrha, and towards the surrounding country, and saw, and behold a flame went up from the earth, as the smoke of a furnace.
28 وَتَطَلَّعَ إِلَى جِهَةِ سَدُومَ وَعَمُورَةَ، وَسَائِرِ أَرْضِ الْبُقْعَةِ وَنَظَرَ، فَإِذَا دُخَانُ الْأَرْضِ صَاعِدٌ كَدُخَانِ الْأَتُونِ.
29 And it came to pass that when God destroyed all the cities of the region round about, God remembered Abraam, and sent Lot out of the midst of the overthrow, when the Lord overthrew those cities in which Lot dwelt.
29 وَلَمَّا دَمَّرَ اللَّهُ مُدُنَ الْبُقْعَةِ، ذَكَرَ اللَّهُ إِبْرَاهِيمَ فَأَطْلَقَ لُوطًا مِنْ وَسَطِ الاِنْقِلَابِ، حِينَ قَلَبَ الْمُدُنَ الَّتِي كَانَ لُوطٌ مُقِيمًا فِيهَا.
Glory be to the Holy Trinity, our God, forever and unto the ages of all ages. Amen.
Ⲟⲩⲱ̀ⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ϯⲧ̀ⲣⲓⲁⲥ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ Ⲡⲉⲛⲛⲟⲩϯ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛⲉⲙ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲛⲓⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲧⲏⲣⲟⲩ: ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ.
مجداً للثالوث القدوس إلهنا الى أبد الآبدين كلها آمين.
	Proverbs 2:16-3:4
(أمثال 2: 16-3: 4)
A reading from the Proverbs of Solomon the prophet. May his holy blessings be with us. Amen.
Ⲉⲃⲟⲗϧⲉⲛ ⲛⲓⲡⲁⲣⲟⲓⲙⲓⲁ̀ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ Ⲥⲟⲗⲟⲙⲱⲛ ⲡⲓⲡ̀ⲣⲟⲫⲏⲧⲏⲥ: ⲉ̀ⲣⲉⲡⲉϥⲥ̀ⲙⲟⲩ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ ϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲛⲉⲙⲁⲛ ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ ⲉϥϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ:
من أمثال سليمان النبي بركته المقدسة تكون معنا. آمين.
16 To deliver you from the immoral woman, From the seductress who flatters with her words,
16 وَتُنْقِذُكَ مِنَ الْمَرْأَةِ الْأَجْنَبِيَّةِ، مِنَ الْغَرِيبَةِ الَّتِي تَتَمَلَّقُ بِكَلَامِهَا،
17 Who forsakes the companion of her youth, And forgets the covenant of her God.
17 الَّتِي تَرَكَتْ مُرْشِدَ صِبَائِهَا، وَنَسِيَتْ عَهْدَ إِلَهِهَا.
18 For her house leads down to death, And her paths to the dead;
18 فَمَالَ إِلَى الْمَوْتِ بَيْتُهَا، وَإِلَى الْجَبَابِرَةِ مَنَاهِجُهَا.
19 None who go to her return, Nor do they regain the paths of life—
19 جَمِيعُ الدَّاخِلِينَ إِلَيْهَا لَا يَعُودُونَ، وَلَا يَتَمَسَّكُونَ بِسُبُلِ الْحَيَاةِ.
20 So you may walk in the way of goodness, And keep to the paths of righteousness.
20 لِكَيْ تَسِيرَ فِي طَرِيقِ الْأَخْيَارِ وَتَحْفَظَ سُبُلَ الصِّدِّيقِينَ.
21 For the upright will dwell in the land, And the blameless will remain in it;
21 لِأَنَّ الْمُسْتَقِيمِينَ يَسْكُنُونَ الْأَرْضَ، وَالسُّلَمَاءَ يَبْقَوْنَ فِيهَا.
22 But the wicked will be cut off from the earth, And the unfaithful will be uprooted from it.
22 أَمَّا الْمُنَافِقُونَ فَيُسْتَأْصَلُونَ مِنَ الْأَرْضِ، وَالْغَادِرُونَ يُقْتَلَعُونَ مِنْهَا.
1 My son, do not forget my law, But let your heart keep my commands;
1 يَا ابْنِي، لَا تَنْسَ شَرِيعَتِي، وَلْيَحْفَظْ قَلْبُكَ وَصَايَايَ.
2 For length of days and long life And peace they will add to you.
2 فَإِنَّهَا تَزِيدُكَ طُولَ أَيَّامٍ، وَسِنِي حَيَاةٍ وَسَلَامًا.
3 Let not mercy and truth forsake you; Bind them around your neck, Write them on the tablet of your heart,
3 لَا تَدَعِ الرَّحْمَةَ وَالْحَقَّ يَتْرُكَانِكَ. تَقَلَّدْهُمَا عَلَى عُنُقِكَ. وَاكْتُبْهُمَا عَلَى لَوْحِ قَلْبِكَ،
4 And so find favor and high esteem In the sight of God and man.
4 فَتَجِدَ نِعْمَةً وَفِطْنَةً صَالِحَةً عِنْدَ اللَّهِ وَالنَّاسِ.
Glory be to the Holy Trinity, our God, forever and unto the ages of all ages. Amen.
Ⲟⲩⲱ̀ⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ϯⲧ̀ⲣⲓⲁⲥ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ Ⲡⲉⲛⲛⲟⲩϯ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛⲉⲙ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲛⲓⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲧⲏⲣⲟⲩ: ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ.
مجداً للثالوث القدوس إلهنا الى أبد الآبدين كلها آمين.
	Isaiah 11:10-12:2
(اشعياء 11: 10-12: 2)
A reading from Isaiah, the prophet. May his holy blessings be with us. Amen.
Ⲉⲃⲟⲗϧⲉⲛ Ⲏⲥⲁⲏ̀ⲁⲥ ⲡⲓⲡ̀ⲣⲟⲫⲏⲧⲏⲥ: ⲉ̀ⲣⲉⲡⲉϥⲥ̀ⲙⲟⲩ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ ϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲛⲉⲙⲁⲛ ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ ⲉϥϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ:
من اشعياء النبي بركته المقدسة تكون معنا. آمين.
10 “And in that day there shall be a Root of Jesse, Who shall stand as a banner to the people; For the Gentiles shall seek Him, And His resting place shall be glorious.”
10 وَيَكُونُ فِي ذَلِكَ الْيَوْمِ أَنَّ أَصْلَ يَسَّى الْقَائِمَ رَايَةً لِلشُّعُوبِ، إِيَّاهُ تَتَرَجَّى الْأُمَمُ، وَيَكُونُ ( قَبْرُهُ ) مُمَجَّدًا.
11 It shall come to pass in that day That the Lord shall set His hand again the second time To recover the remnant of His people who are left, From Assyria and Egypt, From Pathros and Cush, From Elam and Shinar, From Hamath and the islands of the sea.
11 وَفِي ذَلِكَ الْيَوْمِ يَعُودُ السَّيِّدُ فَيَمُدُّ يَدَهُ لِيَقْتَنِيَ بَقِيَّةَ شَعْبِهِ، الَّذِي بَقَيَ مِنْهُ فِي أَشُّورَ، وَمِصْرَ، وَبَابِلَ، وَالْحَبَشَةِ، وَعِيلَامَ، وَالْأَهْوَانَ، وَشِنْعَارَ، وَحَمَاةَ، وَجَزَائِرِ الْبَحْرِ. وَمِنْ مَشَارِقِ الشَّمْسِ وَأَرَابْيَا،
12 He will set up a banner for the nations, And will assemble the outcasts of Israel, And gather together the dispersed of Judah From the four corners of the earth.
12 وَيَرْفَعُ رَايَةً لِلْأُمَمِ، وَيَجْمَعُ الضَّالِّينَ (الْمَنْفِيِّينَ) مِنْ إِسْرَائِيلَ، وَيَضُمُّ الْمُشَتَّتِينَ مِنْ يَهُوذَا مِنْ أَرْبَعَةِ أَطْرَافِ الْأَرْضِ.
13 Also the envy of Ephraim shall depart, And the adversaries of Judah shall be cut off; Ephraim shall not envy Judah, And Judah shall not harass Ephraim.
13 فَيَزُولُ حَسَدُ أَفْرَايِمَ، وَتَضْمَحِلُّ عَدَاوَةُ يَهُوذَا. فَلَا أَفْرَايِمُ يَحْسِدُ يَهُوذَا، وَلَا يَهُوذَا يُعَادِي أَفْرَايِمَ.
14 But they shall fly down upon the shoulder of the Philistines toward the west; Together they shall plunder the people of the East; They shall lay their hand on Edom and Moab; And the people of Ammon shall obey them.
14 وَيَنْقَضُّونَ عَلَى أَكْتَافِ الْفِلِسْطِينِيِّينَ نَحْوَ الْغَرْبِ، وَيَنْهَبُونَ بَنِي الْمَشْرِقِ جَمِيْعًا، وَيُلْقُونَ أَيْدِيَهُمْ عَلَى أَدُومَ وَمُوآبَ، وَيُطِيعُهُمْ بَنُو عَمُّونَ.
15 The Lord will utterly destroy the tongue of the Sea of Egypt; With His mighty wind He will shake His fist over the River, And strike it in the seven streams, And make men cross over dry-shod.
15 وَيُبِيدُ الرَّبُّ لِسَانَ بَحْرِ مِصْرَ، وَيَهُزُّ يَدَهُ عَلَى النَّهْرِ بِرِيحِهِ اللَّافِحَةِ، وَيَشُقُّهُ إِلَى سَبْعَةِ أَوْدِيَةٍ (جَدَاوِلَ)، فَيُعْبَرُ بِالْأَحْذِيَةِ.
16 There will be a highway for the remnant of His people Who will be left from Assyria, As it was for Israel In the day that he came up from the land of Egypt.
16 وَيَكُونُ طَرِيقٌ لِبَقِيَّةِ شَعْبِيَ الَّذِي بَقِيَ فِي مِصْرَ، كَمَا كَانَ لإِسْرَائِيلَ يَوْمَ صَعِدَ مِنْ أَرْضِ مِصْرَ.
1 And in that day you will say: “O Lord, I will praise You; Though You were angry with me, Your anger is turned away, and You comfort me.
1 فَتَقُولُ فِي ذَلِكَ الْيَوْمِ: " أُبَارِكُكَ يَا رَبُّ، لِأَنَّكَ غَضِبْتَ عَلَيَّ ثُمَّ ارْتَدَّ غَضَبُكَ وَفَرَّجْتَ عَنِّي.
2 Behold, God is my salvation, I will trust and not be afraid; ‘For Yah, the Lord, is my strength and song; He also has become my salvation.’”
2 هُوَذَا اللَّهُ خَلَاصِي، فَأَطْمَئِنُّ وَلَا أَفْزَعُ، الرَّبُّ عِزِّي وَتَسْبِيحِي، لَقَدْ كَانَ لِي خَلَاصًا ".
Glory be to the Holy Trinity, our God, forever and unto the ages of all ages. Amen.
Ⲟⲩⲱ̀ⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ϯⲧ̀ⲣⲓⲁⲥ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ Ⲡⲉⲛⲛⲟⲩϯ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛⲉⲙ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲛⲓⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲧⲏⲣⲟⲩ: ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ.
مجداً للثالوث القدوس إلهنا الى أبد الآبدين كلها آمين.