Stand in the fear of God and listen to the Holy Gospel. A reading from the Gospel according to our teacher Saint Mark the Evangelist, and the pure disciple. May his blessings be with us all.
قِفُوا بِخَوْفِ اللهِ، وَأَنْصِتُوا لِسَمَاعِ الإِنْجِيلِ الْمُقَدَّسِ. فَصْلٌ مِنْ بِشَارَةِ الإِنْجِيلِ لِمُعَلِّمِنَا مَارْ مرقس الْبَشِيرِ، التِّلْمِيذِ الطَّاهِرِ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
From the Psalms of our teacher David the prophet. May his blessings be with us all.
مِنْ مَزَامِيرِ تَرَاتِيلِ مُعَلِّمِنَا دَاوُدَ النَّبِيِّ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
Matins Psalm
المزمور
	Psalms 29 :10-11
(مزامير 29 : 10-11)
The Lord heard, and had compassion upon me; the Lord has become my helper! You have turned for me my mourning into joy; You have put off my sackcloth and clothed me with gladness.
Ⲁ̀Ⲡⲟ︦ⲥ︦ ⲥⲱⲧⲉⲙ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁϥⲛⲁⲓ ⲛⲏⲓ: ⲁ̀ Ⲡⲟ︦ⲥ︦ ϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲛⲏⲓ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩⲃⲟⲏ̀ⲑⲟⲥ: ⲁⲕⲫⲱⲛϩ ⲙ̀ⲡⲁⲛⲉϩⲡⲓ ⲉⲩⲣⲁϣⲓ ⲛⲏⲓ: ⲁⲕⲫⲱϧ ⲙ̀ⲡⲁⲥⲟⲕ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁⲕⲙⲟⲣⲧ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩⲟⲩⲛⲟϥ: ⲁ︦ⲗ︦.
سَمِعَ الرَّبُّ فَرَحِمَنِي. الرَّبُّ صَارَ لِي عَوْنًا. رَدَدْتَ نَوْحِي إِلَى فَرَحٍ لِي. مَزَّقْتَ مِسْحِيِ وَمَنْطَقْتَنِي سُرُورًا.
People:
Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
الليلويا.
	Psalm Trailer for the Pope or a Bishop
(Ⲙⲁⲣⲟⲩϭⲁⲥϥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲧ̀ⲉⲕⲕ̀ⲗⲏⲥⲓⲁ̀...)
People:
Amen Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲙⲏⲛ Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
امين الليلويا.
Then the introduction to the Gospel is read.
ثم تقال مقدمة الأنجيل وهي:
Reader:
Blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord. Our Lord, God, Savior and King of us all, Jesus Christ, Son of the living God to whom is glory forever. Amen.
القارﺉُ:
مباركٌ الآتي باسمِ الربِّ إلهِ القواتِ، ربُّنا وإلهُنا ومخلصُنا وملكُنا كلِّنا، يسوعُ المسيحُ، ابنُ اللهِ الحيِّ، الذي لهُ المجدُ إلى الأبدِ. آمين.
Matins Gospel
الإنجيل
	Mark 8:10-21
(مرقس 8: 10-21)
10 immediately got into the boat with His disciples, and came to the region of Dalmanutha.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲥⲁⲧⲟⲧϥ ⲁϥⲁ̀ⲗⲏⲓ ⲉ̀ⲡ̀ϫⲟⲓ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲛⲉϥⲙⲁⲑⲏⲧⲏⲥ ⲁϥⲓ̀ ⲉ̀ⲛⲓⲥⲁ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ Ⲇⲁⲗⲙⲁⲛⲟⲩⲑⲁ.
10 وَلِلْوَقْتِ رَكِبَ السَّفِينَةَ مَعَ تَلَامِيذِهِ وَجَاءَ إِلَى نَوَاحِي دَلْمَانُوثَا.
11 Then the Pharisees came out and began to dispute with Him, seeking from Him a sign from heaven, testing Him.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁⲩⲓ̀ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲛⲓⲪⲁⲣⲓⲥⲉⲟⲥ ⲁⲩⲉⲣϩⲏⲧⲥ ⲛ̀ⲕⲱϯ ⲛⲉⲙⲁϥ ⲉⲩⲕⲱϯ ⲛ̀ⲥⲁ ⲟⲩⲙⲏⲓⲛⲓ ⲛ̀ⲧⲟⲧϥ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗϧⲉⲛ ⲧ̀ⲫⲉ ⲉⲩⲉⲣⲡⲓⲣⲁⲍⲓⲛ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟϥ.
11 فَخَرَجَ الْفَرِّيسِيُّونَ وَابْتَدَأُوا يُبَاحِثُونَهُ طَالِبِينَ مِنْهُ آيَةً مِنَ السَّمَاءِ، لِيُجَرِّبُوهُ.
12 But He sighed deeply in His spirit, and said, “Why does this generation seek a sign? Assuredly, I say to you, no sign shall be given to this generation.”
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉ̀ⲧⲁϥϥⲓⲁ̀ϩⲟⲙ ϧⲉⲛ ⲡⲉϥⲡⲛ︦ⲁ︦ ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ϫⲉ ⲁ̀ϧⲟϥ ⲡⲁⲓϫⲱⲟⲩ ϥ̀ⲕⲱϯ ⲛ̀ⲥⲁ ⲟⲩⲙⲏⲓⲛⲓ ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ ϯϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ⲛⲱⲧⲉⲛ ϫⲉ ⲁⲛ ⲥⲉⲛⲁϯ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩⲙⲏⲓⲛⲓ ⲙ̀ⲡⲁⲓϫⲱⲟⲩ.
12 فَتَنَهَّدَ بِرُوحِهِ وَقَالَ: " مَا بَالُ هَذَا الْجِيلِ يَطْلُبُ آيَةً؟ الْحَقَّ أَقُولُ لَكُمْ: إِنَّهُ لَنْ يُعْطَى هَذَا الْجِيلُ آيَةً! ".
13 And He left them, and getting into the boat again, departed to the other side.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉ̀ⲧⲁϥⲭⲁⲩ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ⲁϥⲁ̀ⲗⲏⲓ ⲉ̀ⲡⲓϫⲟⲓ ⲁϥϣⲉ ⲉ̀ⲙⲏⲣ.
13 ثُمَّ تَرَكَهُمْ وَرَكِبَ السَّفِينَةَ أَيْضًا وَمَضَى إِلَى الْعَبْرِ.
14 Now the disciples had forgotten to take bread, and they did not have more than one loaf with them in the boat.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁⲩⲉⲣⲡ̀ⲱⲃϣ ⲉ̀ϭⲓⲱⲓⲕ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛⲉ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲛ ϩ̀ⲗⲓ ⲛ̀ⲧⲟⲧⲟⲩ ϩⲓ ⲡⲓϫⲟⲓ ⲉ̀ⲃⲏⲗ ⲉ̀ⲟⲩⲱⲓⲕ ⲙ̀ⲙⲁⲩⲁⲧϥ.
14 فَنَسُوا أَنْ يَأْخُذُوا خُبْزًا، وَلَمْ يَكُنْ مَعَهُمْ فِي السَّفِينَةِ سِوَى رَغِيْفٍ وَاحِدٍ.
15 Then He charged them, saying, “Take heed, beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and the leaven of Herod.”
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛⲁϥϩⲟⲛϩⲉⲛ ⲛⲱⲟⲩ ⲉϥϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ϫⲉ ⲁ̀ⲛⲁⲩ ϫⲟⲩϣⲧ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗϩⲁ ⲡ̀ϣⲉⲙⲏⲣ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲛⲓⲪⲁⲣⲓⲥⲉⲟⲥ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲡ̀ϣⲉⲙⲏⲣ ⲛ̀Ⲏ̀ⲣⲱⲇⲏⲥ.
15 وَأَوْصَاهُمْ قَائِلًا: " اُنْظُرُوا! وَتَحَرَّزُوا مِنْ خَمِيرِ الْفَرِّيسِيِّينَ وَخَمِيرِ هِيرُودُسَ ".
16 And they reasoned among themselves, saying, “It is because we have no bread.”
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛⲁⲩⲙⲟⲕⲙⲉⲕ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲛⲟⲩⲉ̀ⲣⲏⲟⲩ ⲉⲩϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ϫⲉ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲛ ⲱⲓⲕ ⲛ̀ⲧⲟⲧⲟⲩ.
16 فَفَكَّرُوا قَائِلِينَ بَعْضُهُمْ لِبَعْضٍ: " إِنَّهُ لَيْسَ مَعَنَا خُبْزٌ ".
17 But Jesus, being aware of it, said to them, “Why do you reason because you have no bread? Do you not yet perceive nor understand? Is your heart still hardened?
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉ̀ⲧⲁϥⲉ̀ⲙⲓ ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ⲛⲱⲟⲩ ϫⲉ ⲁ̀ϧⲱⲧⲉⲛ ⲧⲉⲧⲉⲛⲙⲟⲕⲙⲉⲕ ϫⲉ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲛ ⲱⲓⲕ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉⲛ ⲑⲏⲛⲟⲩ ⲙ̀ⲡⲁⲧⲉⲧⲉⲛⲉ̀ⲙⲓ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲧⲉⲧⲉⲛⲕⲁϯ ⲁⲛ ϥ̀ⲑⲏⲙ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲡⲉⲧⲉⲛϩⲏⲧ.
17 فَعَلِمَ يَسُوعُ وَقَالَ لَهُمْ: " لِمَاذَا تُفَكِّرُونَ أَنْ لَيْسَ عِنْدَكُمْ خُبْزٌ؟ أَلَا تَعْلَمُونَ بَعْدُ وَلَا تَفْهَمُونَ؟ أَحَتَّى الآنَ قُلُوبُكُمْ غَلِيظَةٌ؟
18 Having eyes, do you not see? And having ears, do you not hear? And do you not remember?
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲟⲩⲟⲛ ϩⲁⲛⲃⲁⲗ ⲙ̀ⲙⲱⲧⲉⲛ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉⲧⲉⲛⲛⲁⲩ ⲙ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ⲁⲛ ⲟⲩⲟⲛ ϩⲁⲛⲙⲁϣϫ ⲉ̀ⲣⲱⲧⲉⲛ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉⲧⲉⲛⲥⲱⲧⲉⲙ ⲁⲛ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉⲧⲉⲛⲓ̀ⲣⲓ ⲙ̀ⲫ̀ⲙⲉⲩⲓ ⲁⲛ.
18 أَلَكُمْ أَعْيُنٌ وَلَا تُبْصِرُونَ، وَلَكُمْ آذَانٌ وَلَا تَسْمَعُونَ، وَلَا تَذْكُرُونَ؟
19 When I broke the five loaves for the five thousand, how many baskets full of fragments did you take up?” They said to Him, “Twelve.”
Ⲙ̀ⲡⲓ ⲉ︦ ⲛ̀ⲱⲓⲕ ⲉ̀ⲧⲁⲓⲫⲁϣⲟⲩ ⲉ̀ϩ̀ⲣⲉⲛ ⲡⲓ ⲉ︦ ⲛ̀ϣⲟ ϫⲉ ⲁ̀ⲧⲉⲧⲉⲛⲉⲗ ⲟⲩⲏⲣ ⲛ̀ⲕⲟⲧ ⲛ̀ⲗⲁⲕϩ ⲉⲩⲙⲉϩ ⲡⲉϫⲱⲟⲩ ⲛⲁϥ ϫⲉ ⲓ︦ⲃ︦.
19 إذْ كَسَّرْتُ الْخَمْسَةَ الْأَرْغِفَةَ لِلْخَمْسَةِ الْآلَافِ، كَمْ قُفَّةً مَمْلُوءَةً كِسَرًا رَفَعْتُمْ؟ " قَالُوا لَهُ: " اِثْنَتَيْ عَشْرَةَ ".
20 “Also, when I broke the seven for the four thousand, how many large baskets full of fragments did you take up?” And they said, “Seven.”
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲡⲓⲍ︦ ⲉ̀ϩ̀ⲣⲉⲛ ⲡⲓⲇ︦ ⲛ̀ϣⲟ ϫⲉ ⲁⲧⲉⲧⲉⲛⲉⲗ ⲟⲩⲏⲣ ⲙ̀ⲃⲓⲣ ⲉⲩⲙⲉϩ ⲛ̀ⲗⲁⲕϩ ⲡⲉϫⲱⲟⲩ ⲛⲁϥ ϫⲉ ⲍ︦.
20 " وَإذْ كَسَّرْتُ السَّبْعَةَ الْأَرْغِفَةَ لِلأَرْبَعَةِ الآلَافِ، كَمْ سَلًّا مَمْلُوءًا مِنْ الكِسَرِ رَفَعْتُمْ؟ " قَالُوا لَهُ: " سَبْعَةً ".
21 So He said to them, “How is it you do not understand?”
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛⲁϥϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ⲛⲱⲟⲩ ϫⲉ ⲡⲱⲥ ⲧⲉⲧⲉⲛⲕⲁϯ ⲁⲛ.
21 فَقَالَ لَهُمْ: " كَيْفَ لَا تَفْهَمُونَ؟ ".