Stand in the fear of God and listen to the Holy Gospel. A reading from the Gospel according to our teacher Saint Matthew the Evangelist, and the pure disciple. May his blessings be with us all.
قِفُوا بِخَوْفِ اللهِ، وَأَنْصِتُوا لِسَمَاعِ الإِنْجِيلِ الْمُقَدَّسِ. فَصْلٌ مِنْ بِشَارَةِ الإِنْجِيلِ لِمُعَلِّمِنَا مَارْ متى الْبَشِيرِ، التِّلْمِيذِ الطَّاهِرِ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
From the Psalms of our teacher David the prophet. May his blessings be with us all.
مِنْ مَزَامِيرِ تَرَاتِيلِ مُعَلِّمِنَا دَاوُدَ النَّبِيِّ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
Matins Psalm
المزمور
	Psalms 78:7-8
(مزامير 78: 7-8)
Let Your tender mercies speedily prevent us; for we are greatly impoverished. Help us, O God our Savior, for the glory of Your name.
Ⲙⲁⲣⲟⲩⲉⲣϣⲟⲣⲡ ⲛ̀ⲧⲁϩⲟⲛ ⲛ̀ⲭⲱⲗⲉⲙ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲛⲉⲕⲙⲉⲧϣⲉⲛϩⲏⲧ: ϫⲉ ⲁⲛⲉⲣϩⲏⲕⲓ ⲉ̀ⲙⲁϣⲱ. Ⲁⲣⲓⲃⲟⲏ̀ⲑⲓⲛ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟⲛ Ⲫⲛⲟⲩϯ ⲡⲉⲛⲥⲱⲧⲏⲣ: ⲉⲑⲃⲉ ⲡ̀ⲱ̀ⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲡⲉⲕⲣⲁⲛ: ⲁ︦ⲗ︦.
فَلْتُدْرِكْنَا رَأْفَاتُكَ سَرِيعًا، لِأَنَّنَا قَدِ اِفْتَقَرْنَا جِدًّا. أَعِنَّا يَا أَللَّهُ مُخَلِّصَنَا، مِنْ أَجْلِ مَجْدِ اسْمِكَ.
People:
Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
الليلويا.
	Psalm Trailer for the Pope or a Bishop
(Ⲙⲁⲣⲟⲩϭⲁⲥϥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲧ̀ⲉⲕⲕ̀ⲗⲏⲥⲓⲁ̀...)
People:
Amen Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲙⲏⲛ Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
امين الليلويا.
Then the introduction to the Gospel is read.
ثم تقال مقدمة الأنجيل وهي:
Reader:
Blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord. Our Lord, God, Savior and King of us all, Jesus Christ, Son of the living God to whom is glory forever. Amen.
القارﺉُ:
مباركٌ الآتي باسمِ الربِّ إلهِ القواتِ، ربُّنا وإلهُنا ومخلصُنا وملكُنا كلِّنا، يسوعُ المسيحُ، ابنُ اللهِ الحيِّ، الذي لهُ المجدُ إلى الأبدِ. آمين.
Matins Gospel
الإنجيل
	Matthew 9:1-8
(متى 9: 1-8)
1 So He got into a boat, crossed over, and came to His own city.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉ̀ⲧⲁϥⲁ̀ⲗⲏⲓ ⲉ̀ⲡⲓϫⲟⲓ ⲁϥⲓ̀ ⲉ̀ⲙⲏⲣ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁϥⲓ̀ ⲉ̀ϧⲟⲩⲛ ⲉ̀ⲧⲉϥⲃⲁⲕⲓ.
1 فَرَكِبَ السَّفِينَةَ وَجَاءَ إِلَى الْعَبْرِ وَأَتَى إِلَى مَدِينَتِهِ.
2 Then behold, they brought to Him a paralytic lying on a bed. When Jesus saw their faith, He said to the paralytic, “Son, be of good cheer; your sins are forgiven you.”
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ϩⲏⲡⲡⲉ ⲁⲩⲓ̀ⲛⲓ ⲛⲁϥ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩⲁⲓ ⲉϥϣⲏⲗ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ⲉϥϣ̀ⲧⲏⲟⲩⲧ ϩⲓϫⲉⲛ ⲟⲩϭⲗⲟϫ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉ̀ⲧⲁϥⲛⲁⲩ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ Ⲓⲏ︦ⲥ︦ ⲉ̀ⲡⲟⲩⲛⲁϩϯ ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ⲙ̀ⲫⲏⲉⲧϣⲏⲗ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ϫⲉ ϫⲉⲙⲛⲟⲙϯ ⲡⲁϣⲏⲣⲓ ⲛⲉⲕⲛⲟⲃⲓ ⲥⲉⲭⲏ ⲛⲁⲕ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ.
2 فَقَدَّمُوا إِلَيْهِ مُخَلَّعًا مَطْرُوحًا عَلَى سَرِيرٍ. فَلَمَّا رَأَى يَسُوعُ إِيمَانَهُمْ قَالَ لِلْمُخَلَّعِ: " ثِقْ يَا بُنَيَّ. مَغْفُورَةٌ لَكَ خَطَايَاكَ ".
3 And at once some of the scribes said within themselves, “This Man blasphemes!”
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲓⲥ ϩⲁⲛⲟⲩⲟⲛ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗϧⲉⲛ ⲛⲓⲥⲁϧ ⲡⲉϫⲱⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ϧ̀ⲣⲏⲓ ⲛ̀ϧⲏⲧⲟⲩ ϫⲉ ⲫⲁⲓ ϫⲉⲟⲩⲁ̀.
3 فَقَالَ قَوْمٌ مِنَ الْكَتَبَةِ فِي أَنْفُسِهِمْ: " هَذَا يُجَدِّفُ! ".
4 But Jesus, knowing their thoughts, said, “Why do you think evil in your hearts?
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉ̀ⲧⲁϥⲛⲁⲩ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ Ⲓⲏ︦ⲥ︦ ⲉ̀ⲛⲟⲩⲙⲟⲕⲙⲉⲕ ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ϫⲉ ⲉⲑⲃⲉ ⲟⲩ ⲧⲉⲧⲉⲛⲙⲟⲕⲙⲉⲕ ⲉ̀ϩⲁⲛⲡⲉⲧϩⲱⲟⲩ ϧⲉⲛ ⲛⲉⲧⲉⲛϩⲏⲧ.
4 وَعَلِمَ يَسُوعُ أَفْكَارَهُمْ، فَقَالَ لَهُمْ: " لِمَاذَا تُفَكِّرُونَ بِالشَّرِّ فِي قُلُوبِكُمْ؟
5 For which is easier, to say, ‘Your sins are forgiven you,’ or to say, ‘Arise and walk’?
Ⲟⲩ ⲅⲁⲣ ⲉⲑⲙⲟⲧⲉⲛ ⲉ̀ϫⲟⲥ ϫⲉ ⲛⲉⲕⲛⲟⲃⲓ ⲥⲉⲭⲏ ⲛⲁⲕ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ϣⲁⲛ ⲉ̀ϫⲟⲥ ϫⲉ ⲧⲱⲛⲕ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲙⲟϣⲓ.
5 أَيُّمَا أَيْسَرُ، أَنْ يُقَالَ: مَغْفُورَةٌ لَكَ خَطَايَاكَ، أَمْ أَنْ يُقَالَ: قُمْ وَامْشِ؟
6 But that you may know that the Son of Man has power on earth to forgive sins”—then He said to the paralytic, “Arise, take up your bed, and go to your house.”
Ϩⲓⲛⲁ ⲇⲉ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉⲧⲉⲛⲉ̀ⲙⲓ ϫⲉ ⲟⲩⲟⲛ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ Ⲡ̀ϣⲏⲣⲓ ⲙ̀Ⲫ̀ⲣⲱⲙⲓ ⲛ̀ⲉⲣϣⲓϣⲓ ⲙ̀ⲙⲁⲩ ⲉ̀ⲭⲁ ⲛⲟⲃⲓ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ϩⲓϫⲉⲛ ⲡⲓⲕⲁϩⲓ ⲧⲟⲧⲉ ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ⲙ̀ⲫⲏⲉⲧϣⲏⲗ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ϫⲉ ⲧⲱⲛⲕ ⲱ̀ⲗⲓ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉⲕϭⲗⲟϫ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲙⲁϣⲉⲛⲁⲕ ⲉ̀ⲡⲉⲕⲏⲓ.
6 وَلَكِنْ لِكَيْ تَعْلَمُوا أَنَّ لِابْنِ الْإِنْسَانِ سُلْطَانًا عَلَى الْأَرْضِ أَنْ يَغْفِرَ الْخَطَايَا ". حِينَئِذٍ قَالَ لِلْمُخَلَّعِ: " قُمِ احْمِلْ سَرِيرَكَ وَاذْهَبْ إِلَى بَيْتِكَ ".
7 And he arose and departed to his house.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁϥⲧⲱⲛϥ ⲁϥϣⲉⲛⲁϥ ⲉ̀ⲡⲉϥⲏⲓ.
7 فَقَامَ وَمَضَى إِلَى بَيْتِهِ.
8 Now when the multitudes saw it, they marveled and glorified God, who had given such power to men.
Ⲉ̀ⲧⲁⲩⲛⲁⲩ ⲇⲉ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲛⲓⲙⲏϣ ⲁⲩⲉⲣϩⲟϯ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁⲩϯⲱ̀ⲟⲩ ⲙ̀Ⲫϯ ⲫⲏⲉ̀ⲧⲁϥϯⲉⲣϣⲓϣⲓ ⲙ̀ⲡⲁⲓⲣⲏϯ ⲛ̀ⲛⲓⲣⲱⲙⲓ.
8 فَلَمَّا رَأَى الْجُمُوعُ خَافُوا وَمَجَّدُوا اللَّهَ الَّذِي أَعْطَى النَّاسَ سُلْطَانًا مِثْلَ هَذَا.