Stand in the fear of God and listen to the Holy Gospel. A reading from the Gospel according to our teacher Saint Luke the Evangelist, and the pure disciple. May his blessings be with us all.
قِفُوا بِخَوْفِ اللهِ، وَأَنْصِتُوا لِسَمَاعِ الإِنْجِيلِ الْمُقَدَّسِ. فَصْلٌ مِنْ بِشَارَةِ الإِنْجِيلِ لِمُعَلِّمِنَا مَارْ لوقا الْبَشِيرِ، التِّلْمِيذِ الطَّاهِرِ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
From the Psalms of our teacher David the prophet. May his blessings be with us all.
مِنْ مَزَامِيرِ تَرَاتِيلِ مُعَلِّمِنَا دَاوُدَ النَّبِيِّ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
Matins Psalm
المزمور
	Psalms 64:2-3
(مزامير 64: 2-3)
Lord, hear my prayer, To You all flesh will come. The words of transgressors have overpowered us.
Ⲥⲱⲧⲉⲙ Ⲫϯ ⲉ̀ⲧⲁⲡ̀ⲣⲟⲥⲉⲩⲭⲏ: ⲥⲉⲛⲏⲟⲩ ϩⲁⲣⲟⲕ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲥⲁⲣⲝ ⲛⲓⲃⲉⲛ: ⲛⲓⲥⲁϫⲓ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲛⲓⲁ̀ⲛⲟⲙⲟⲥ: ⲁⲩϫⲉⲙϫⲟⲙ ⲉ̀ϩⲟⲧⲉⲣⲟⲛ: ⲁ︦ⲗ︦.
اِسْتَمِعْ يَا أَللَّهُ صَلَاتِي، لِأَنَّهُ إِلَيْكَ يَأْتِي كُلُّ بَشَرٍ. كَلَامُ مُخَالِفِي النَّامُوسِ، قَدْ قَوِيَ عَلَيْنَا.
People:
Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
الليلويا.
	Psalm Trailer for the Pope or a Bishop
(Ⲙⲁⲣⲟⲩϭⲁⲥϥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲧ̀ⲉⲕⲕ̀ⲗⲏⲥⲓⲁ̀...)
People:
Amen Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲙⲏⲛ Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
امين الليلويا.
Then the introduction to the Gospel is read.
ثم تقال مقدمة الأنجيل وهي:
Reader:
Blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord. Our Lord, God, Savior and King of us all, Jesus Christ, Son of the living God to whom is glory forever. Amen.
القارﺉُ:
مباركٌ الآتي باسمِ الربِّ إلهِ القواتِ، ربُّنا وإلهُنا ومخلصُنا وملكُنا كلِّنا، يسوعُ المسيحُ، ابنُ اللهِ الحيِّ، الذي لهُ المجدُ إلى الأبدِ. آمين.
Matins Gospel
الإنجيل
	Luke 15:3-10
(لوقا 15: 3-10)
3 So He spoke this parable to them, saying:
Ⲁϥϫⲉ ⲧⲁⲓⲡⲁⲣⲁⲃⲟⲗⲏ ⲛⲱⲟⲩ ⲉϥϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ.
3 فَخَاطَبَهُمْ بِهذا الْمَثَلِ قَائِلًا:
4 “What man of you, having a hundred sheep, if he loses one of them, does not leave the ninety-nine in the wilderness, and go after the one which is lost until he finds it?
Ϫⲉ ⲛⲓⲙ ⲛ̀ⲣⲱⲙⲓ ⲉⲧϧⲉⲛ ⲑⲏⲛⲟⲩ ⲉⲧⲉ ⲟⲩⲟⲛⲧⲉϥ ⲣ︦ ⲛⲉ̀ⲥⲱⲟⲩ ⲙ̀ⲙⲁⲩ ⲁϥϣⲁⲛⲧⲁⲕⲉ ⲟⲩⲁⲓ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ⲛ̀ϧⲏⲧⲟⲩ ⲙⲏ ⲙ̀ⲡⲁϥⲭⲁ ⲡⲓϥ︦ⲑ︦ ⲛ̀ⲥⲱϥ ϩⲓ ⲡ̀ϣⲁϥⲉ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉϥϣⲉ ⲛⲁϥ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉϥⲕⲱϯ ⲛ̀ⲥⲁ ⲫⲏ ⲧⲁϥⲧⲁⲕⲟ ϣⲁⲧⲉϥϫⲉⲙϥ.
4 " أيُّ رَجُلٍ مِنْكُمْ لَهُ مِئَةُ خَرُوفٍ، إذَا أَضَاعَ وَاحِدًا مِنْهَا، أَفَلَا يَتْرُكُ التِّسْعَةَ وَالتِّسْعِينَ في الْبَرِّيَّةِ، وَيَذْهَبُ وَيَطْلُبُ الضَّالَّ حَتَّى يَجِدَهُ؟
5 And when he has found it, he lays it on his shoulders, rejoicing.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁϥϣⲁⲛϫⲉⲙϥ ϣⲁϥⲧⲁⲗⲟϥ ⲉ̀ϫⲉⲛ ⲛⲉϥⲙⲟϯ ⲉϥⲣⲁϣⲓ.
5 وَإذَا وَجَدَهُ يَحْمِلُهُ عَلَى مَنْكِبَيْهِ فَرِحًا،
6 And when he comes home, he calls together his friends and neighbors, saying to them, ‘Rejoice with me, for I have found my sheep which was lost!’
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁϥϣⲁⲛⲓ̀ ⲉ̀ⲡⲓⲏⲓ ϣⲁϥⲙⲟⲩϯ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϥϣ̀ⲫⲏⲣ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲛⲉϥⲑⲉϣⲉⲩ ⲉϥϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ⲛⲱⲟⲩ ϫⲉ ⲣⲁϣⲓ ⲛⲉⲙⲏⲓ ⲧⲏⲣⲟⲩ ϫⲉ ⲁⲓϫⲓⲙⲓ ⲙ̀ⲡⲁⲉ̀ⲥⲱⲟⲩ ⲉⲧⲁϥⲧⲁⲕⲟ.
6 وإذَا جَاءَ إِلَى الْمَنْزِلِ يَدْعُو أَصْدِقَاءَهُ وَجِيرَانَهُ قَائِلًا لَهُمْ: افْرَحُوا مَعِي جَمِيعًا، لأنِّي قَدْ وَجَدْتُ خَرُوفِيَ الضَّالَّ!.
7 I say to you that likewise there will be more joy in heaven over one sinner who repents than over ninety-nine just persons who need no repentance.
Ϯϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ⲱⲧⲉⲛ ⲉ ⲟⲩⲟⲛ ⲟⲩⲣⲁϣⲓ ⲛⲁϣⲱⲡⲓ ϧⲉⲛ ⲧ̀ⲫⲉ ⲉ̀ϫⲉⲛ ⲟⲩⲣⲉϥⲉⲣⲛⲟⲃⲓ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩⲱⲧ ⲉϥⲉⲣⲙⲉⲧⲁⲛⲟⲓⲛ ⲓⲉ ⲉ̀ϫⲉⲛ ⲡⲓϥ︦ⲑ︦ ⲛ̀ⲑ̀ⲙⲏⲓ.
7 أَقُولُ لَكُمْ: إِنَّهُ يَكُونُ فَرَحٌ في السَّمَاءِ بِخَاطِئٍ وَاحِدٍ يَتُوبُ أَكْثَرَ مِنَ التِّسْعَةِ وَالتِّسْعِينَ بَارًّا الَّذِينَ لَا يَحْتَاجُونَ إِلَى تَوْبَةٍ.
8 “Or what woman, having ten silver coins, if she loses one coin, does not light a lamp, sweep the house, and search carefully until she finds it?
Ⲓⲉ ⲛⲓⲙ ⲛ̀ⲥ̀ϩⲓⲙⲓ ⲉⲧⲉ ⲩⲟⲛⲧⲉⲥ ⲓ︦ ⲛ̀ϫⲉⲥⲕⲓϯ ⲙ̀ⲙⲁⲩ ⲉϣⲱⲡ ⲁⲥϣⲁⲛⲧⲁⲕⲉ ⲟⲩⲓ̀ ⲙ̀ⲙⲱⲟⲩ ⲙⲏ ⲙ̀ⲡⲁⲥϭⲉⲣⲉ ⲟⲩϧⲏⲃⲥ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉⲥⲥⲁⲣϩ ⲡⲓⲏⲓ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉⲥⲕⲱϯ ϧⲉⲛ ⲩϥⲓⲣⲱⲟⲩϣ ϣⲁⲧⲉⲥϫⲉⲙⲥ.
8 أوْ أَيَّةُ امْرَأَةٍ لَهَا عَشَرَةُ دَرَاهِمَ، إِنْ أَضَاعَتْ وَاحِدًا مِنْهَا، أَلَا تُوقِدُ سِرَاجًا وَتَكْنُسُ الْبَيْتَ وَتُفَتِّشُ بِاهْتِمَامٍ حَتَّى تَجِدَهُ؟
9 And when she has found it, she calls her friends and neighbors together, saying, ‘Rejoice with me, for I have found the piece which I lost!’
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉϣⲱⲡ ⲁⲥϣⲁⲛϫⲉⲙⲥ ϣⲁⲥⲙⲟⲩϯ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉⲥϣ̀ⲫⲏⲣ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲛⲉⲥⲑⲉϣⲉⲩ ⲉⲥϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ϫⲉ ⲣⲁϣⲓ ⲛⲉⲙⲏⲓ ϫⲉ ⲓϫⲓⲙⲓ ⲛ̀ⲧⲁϫⲉⲥⲕⲓϯ ⲉⲧⲁⲥⲧⲁⲕⲟ.
9 وَإذَا وَجَدَتْهُ تَدْعُو صَدِيقَاتِهَا وَجَارَاتِهَا قَائِلَةً: افْرَحْنَ مَعِي لأنِّي وَجَدْتُ دِرْهَمِي الَّذِي ضَاعَ.
10 Likewise, I say to you, there is joy in the presence of the angels of God over one sinner who repents.”
Ⲡⲁⲓⲣⲏϯ ϯϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ⲛⲱⲧⲉⲛ ϫⲉ ϣⲁⲣⲉ ⲟⲩⲣⲁϣⲓ ϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉⲙ̀ⲑⲟ ⲛ̀ⲛⲓⲁⲅⲅⲉⲗⲟⲥ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲫϯ ⲉ̀ϫⲉⲛ ⲩⲣⲉϥⲉⲣⲛⲟⲃⲓ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩⲱⲧ ⲉϥⲉⲣⲙⲉⲧⲁⲛⲟⲓⲛ.
10 هكَذَا، أَقُولُ لَكُمْ: إِنَّهُ يَكُونُ فَرَحٌ قُدَّامَ مَلَائِكَةِ اللَّهِ بِخَاطِئٍ وَاحِدٍ يَتُوبُ.