Stand in the fear of God and listen to the Holy Gospel. A reading from the Gospel according to our teacher Saint Mark the Evangelist, and the pure disciple. May his blessings be with us all.
قِفُوا بِخَوْفِ اللهِ، وَأَنْصِتُوا لِسَمَاعِ الإِنْجِيلِ الْمُقَدَّسِ. فَصْلٌ مِنْ بِشَارَةِ الإِنْجِيلِ لِمُعَلِّمِنَا مَارْ مرقس الْبَشِيرِ، التِّلْمِيذِ الطَّاهِرِ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
From the Psalms of our teacher David the prophet. May his blessings be with us all.
مِنْ مَزَامِيرِ تَرَاتِيلِ مُعَلِّمِنَا دَاوُدَ النَّبِيِّ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
Liturgy Psalm
المزمور
	Psalms 77:5,134:5
(مزامير 77: 5,134: 5)
For He established a testimony in Jacob, And appointed a law in Israel. For I know that the Lord is great, And our Lord is above all gods.
Ⲁϥⲧⲁϩⲟ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩⲙⲉⲧⲙⲉⲑⲣⲉ ⲉ̀ⲣⲁⲧⲥ ϧⲉⲛ Ⲓⲁⲕⲱⲃ: ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁϥⲥⲉⲙⲛⲓ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩⲛⲟⲙⲟⲥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲡ̀Ⲓⲥⲣⲁⲏ̀ⲗ: ⲁ̀ⲛⲟⲕ ⲁⲓⲉ̀ⲙⲓ ϫⲉ ⲟⲩⲛⲓϣϯ ⲡⲉ Ⲡⲟ︦ⲥ︦: ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲡⲉⲛϭⲟⲓⲥ ⲉ̀ϩⲟⲧⲉ ⲛⲓⲛⲟⲩϯ ⲧⲏⲣⲟⲩ. ⲁ︦ⲗ︦.
إذْ أَقَامَ الشَّهَادَةَ في يَعْقُوبَ، وَوَضَعَ النَّامُوسَ في إسْرَائِيلَ. لأنِّي أَنَا قَدْ عَلِمْتُ أَنَّ الرَّبَّ عَظِيمٌ هُوَ. وَرَبَّنا أَفْضَلُ مِنْ جَمِيعِ الآلِهَةِ. هَلِّلُويَا.
People:
Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
الليلويا.
	Psalm Trailer for the Pope or a Bishop
(Ⲙⲁⲣⲟⲩϭⲁⲥϥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲧ̀ⲉⲕⲕ̀ⲗⲏⲥⲓⲁ̀...)
People:
Amen Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲙⲏⲛ Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
امين الليلويا.
Then the introduction to the Gospel is read.
ثم تقال مقدمة الأنجيل وهي:
Reader:
Blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord. Our Lord, God, Savior and King of us all, Jesus Christ, Son of the living God to whom is glory forever. Amen.
القارﺉُ:
مباركٌ الآتي باسمِ الربِّ إلهِ القواتِ، ربُّنا وإلهُنا ومخلصُنا وملكُنا كلِّنا، يسوعُ المسيحُ، ابنُ اللهِ الحيِّ، الذي لهُ المجدُ إلى الأبدِ. آمين.
Liturgy Gospel
الإنجيل
	Mark 10:35-45
(مرقس 10: 35-45)
35 Then James and John, the sons of Zebedee, came to Him, saying, “Teacher, we want You to do for us whatever we ask.”
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁⲩⲓ̀ ϩⲁⲣⲟϥ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ Ⲓⲁⲕⲱⲃⲟⲥ ⲛⲉⲙ Ⲓⲱⲁⲛⲛⲏⲥ ⲡ̀ϣⲏⲣⲓ ⲛ̀Ⲍⲉⲃⲉⲇⲉⲟⲥ ⲉⲩϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ⲛⲁϥ ϫⲉ ⲫ̀ⲣⲉϥϯⲥ̀ⲃⲱ ⲧⲉⲛⲟⲩⲱϣ ϩⲓⲛⲁ ⲫⲏⲉ̀ⲧⲉⲛⲛⲁⲉⲣⲉ̀ⲧⲓⲛ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟϥ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉⲕⲁⲓϥ ⲛⲁⲛ.
35 وَتَقَدَّمَ إلَيْهِ يَعْقُوبُ وَيُوحَنَّا ابْنَا زَبْدِي قَائِلَيْنِ لَهُ: " يَا مُعَلِّمُ، نُرِيدُ أَنْ تَفْعَلَ لَنَا كُلَّ مَا طَلَبْنَاهُ ".
36 And He said to them, “What do you want Me to do for you?”
Ⲛ̀ⲑⲟϥ ⲇⲉ ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ⲛⲱⲟⲩ ϫⲉ ⲟⲩ ⲧⲉⲧⲉⲛⲟⲩⲁϣϥ ⲛ̀ⲧⲁⲁⲓϥ ⲛⲱⲧⲉⲛ.
36 فَقَالَ لَهُمَا: " مَاذَا تُرِيدَانِ أَنْ أَفْعَلَ لَكُمَا؟ ".
37 They said to Him, “Grant us that we may sit, one on Your right hand and the other on Your left, in Your glory.”
Ⲛ̀ⲑⲱⲟⲩ ⲡⲉϫⲱⲟⲩ ⲛⲁϥ ϫⲉ ⲙⲏ ⲓⲥ ⲛⲁⲛ ϩⲓⲛⲁ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲟⲩⲁⲓ ϩⲉⲙⲥⲓ ⲥⲁⲧⲉⲕⲟⲩⲓ̀ⲛⲁⲙ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲟⲩⲁⲓ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲛ ⲥⲁⲧⲉⲕϫⲁϭⲏ ϧⲉⲛ ⲡⲉⲕⲱⲟⲩ.
37 فَقَالَا لَهُ: " أَعْطِنَا أَنْ نَجْلِسَ وَاحِدٌ عَنْ يَمِينِكَ وَالآخَرُ عَنْ يَسَارِكَ في مَجْدِكَ ".
38 But Jesus said to them, “You do not know what you ask. Are you able to drink the cup that I drink, and be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with?”
Ⲓⲏ︦ⲥ︦ ⲇⲉ ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ⲛⲱⲟⲩ ϫⲉ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉⲧⲉⲛⲉ̀ⲙⲓ ⲁⲛ ϫⲉ ⲟⲩ ⲡⲉⲧⲉⲧⲉⲛⲛⲁⲉⲣⲉ̀ⲧⲓⲛ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟϥ ⲟⲩⲟⲛϣ̀ϫⲟⲙ ⲙ̀ⲙⲱⲧⲉⲛ ⲉ̀ⲥⲉ ⲡⲓⲁ̀ⲫⲟⲧ ⲉ̀ϯⲥⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟϥ ⲓⲉ ⲡⲓⲱⲙⲥ ⲉ̀ϯⲱⲙⲥ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲓ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟϥ.
38 فَقَالَ لَهُمَا يَسُوعُ: " لَسْتُمَا تَعْلَمَانِ مَا تَطْلُبَانِ. أَتَسْتَطِيعَانِ أَنْ تَشْرَبَا الْكَأْسَ الَّتِي أَشْرَبُهَا أَنَا، وَأَنْ تَصْطَبِغَا بِالصِّبْغَةِ الَّتِي أَصْطَبِغُ بِهَا أَنَا؟ ".
39 They said to Him, “We are able.” So Jesus said to them, “You will indeed drink the cup that I drink, and with the baptism I am baptized with you will be baptized;
Ⲛ̀ⲑⲱⲟⲩ ⲇⲉ ⲡⲉϫⲱⲟⲩ ⲛⲁϥ ϫⲉ ⲟⲩⲟⲛϣ̀ϫⲟⲙ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲛ Ⲓⲏ︦ⲥ︦ ⲇⲉ ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ⲛⲱⲟⲩ ϫⲉ ⲡⲓⲁ̀ⲫⲟⲧ ⲉ̀ϯⲥⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟϥ ⲉ̀ⲣⲉⲧⲉⲛⲉ̀ⲥⲟϥ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲓⲱⲙⲥⲉ̀ϯⲱⲙⲥ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲓ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟϥ ⲉ̀ⲣⲉⲧⲉⲛⲉ̀ⲉⲙⲥ ⲑⲏⲛⲟⲩ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟϥ.
39 فَقَالَا لَهُ: " نَسْتَطِيعُ ". فَقَالَ لَهُمَا يَسُوعُ: " أَمَّا الْكَأْسُ الَّتِي أَشْرَبُهَا أَنَا فَتَشْرَبَانِهَا، وَالصِّبْغَةُ الَّتِي أَصْطَبِغُ بِهَا أَنَا تَصْطَبِغَانِ.
40 but to sit on My right hand and on My left is not Mine to give, but it is for those for whom it is prepared.”
Ⲡⲓϩⲉⲙⲥⲓ ⲇⲉ ⲛ̀ⲥⲁⲟⲩⲓ̀ⲛⲁⲙ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲓ ⲓⲉ ϫⲁϭⲏ ⲙ̀ⲫⲱⲓ ⲁⲛ ⲡⲉ ⲉ̀ⲧⲏⲓϥ ⲁⲗⲗⲁ ⲫⲁ ⲛⲏ ⲡⲉ ⲉ̀ⲧⲁϥⲥⲉⲃⲧⲱⲧϥ ⲛⲱⲟⲩ.
40 وَأمَّا الْجُلُوسُ عَنْ يَمِينِي وَعَنْ يَسَارِي فَلَيْسَ لي أَنْ أُعْطِيَهُ إلَّا لِلَّذِينَ أُعِدَّ لَهُمْ ".
41 And when the ten heard it, they began to be greatly displeased with James and John.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉ̀ⲧⲁⲩⲥⲱⲧⲉⲙ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲡⲓⲕⲉⲓ︦ ⲁⲩⲉⲣϩⲏⲧⲥ ⲛ̀ⲭ̀ⲣⲉⲙⲣⲉⲙ ⲉⲑⲃⲉ Ⲓⲁⲕⲱⲃⲟⲥ ⲛⲉⲙ Ⲓⲱⲁⲛⲛⲏⲥ.
41 وَلَمَّا سَمِعَ الْعَشَرَةُ ابْتَدَأُوا يَتَذَمَّرُونَ عَلَى يَعْقُوبَ وَيُوحَنَّا.
42 But Jesus called them to Himself and said to them, “You know that those who are considered rulers over the Gentiles lord it over them, and their great ones exercise authority over them.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉ̀ⲧⲁϥⲙⲟⲩϯ ⲉ̀ⲣⲱⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ Ⲓⲏ︦ⲥ︦ ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ⲛⲱⲟⲩ ϫⲉ ⲧⲉⲧⲉⲛⲉ̀ⲙⲓ ϫⲉ ⲛⲏⲉⲑⲙⲉⲩⲓ ϫⲉ ⲥⲉⲟⲓ ⲛ̀ⲁⲣⲭⲱⲛ ⲉ̀ⲛⲓⲉⲑⲛⲟⲥ ⲥⲉⲟⲓ ⲛ̀ ⲥ︦ ⲉ̀ⲣⲱⲟⲩ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛⲟⲩⲛⲓϣϯ ⲥⲉⲟⲓ ⲛ̀ⲉⲣϣⲓϣⲓ ⲡ̀ⲉϫⲱⲟⲩ.
42 فَدَعَاهُمْ يَسُوعُ وَقَالَ لَهُمْ: " أَنْتُمْ تَعْلَمُونَ أَنَّ الَّذِينَ يُحْسَبُونَ رُؤسَاءَ الأُمَم يَسُودُونَهُمْ. وَأَنَّ عُظَمَاءَهُمْ يَتَسَلَّطونَ عَلَيْهِمْ.
43 Yet it shall not be so among you; but whoever desires to become great among you shall be your servant.
Ⲡⲁⲓⲣⲏϯ ⲇⲉ ⲁⲛ ⲡⲉⲧϣⲟⲡ ϧⲉⲛ ⲑⲏⲛⲟⲩ ⲁⲗⲗⲁ ⲫⲏⲉⲑⲛⲁⲟⲩⲱϣ ⲉ̀ⲉⲣⲛⲓϣϯ ϧⲉⲛ ⲑⲏⲛⲟⲩ ⲉϥⲉ̀ⲉⲣⲇⲓⲁ̀ⲕⲱⲛ ⲛⲱⲧⲉⲛ.
43 فَلَا يَكُونُ هكَذَا فِيكُمْ. بَلْ مَنْ أَرَادَ أَنْ يَصِيرَ فِيكُمْ عَظِيمًا، يَكُونُ لَكُمْ خَادِمًا،
44 And whoever of you desires to be first shall be slave of all.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲫⲏⲉⲑⲛⲁⲟⲩⲱϣ ⲉ̀ⲉⲣϩⲟⲩⲓⲧ ϧⲉⲛ ⲑⲏⲛⲟⲩ ⲉϥⲉ̀ⲉⲣⲃⲱⲕ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩⲟⲛ ⲛⲓⲃⲉⲛ.
44 وَمَنْ أَرَادَ أَنْ يَصِيرَ فِيكُمْ أوَّلًا، يَكُونُ لِلْجَمِيعِ عَبْدًا.
45 For even the Son of Man did not come to be served, but to serve, and to give His life a ransom for many.”
Ⲟⲩ ⲅⲁⲣ ⲡ̀ⲱⲏⲣⲓ ⲙ̀ⲫ̀ⲣⲱⲙⲓ ⲛⲉ̀ⲧⲁϥⲓ̀ ⲁⲛ ⲉⲑⲣⲟⲩϣⲉⲙϣⲏⲧϥ ⲁⲗⲗⲁ ⲉ̀ϣⲉⲙϣⲓ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉ̀ϯ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉϥⲯⲩⲭⲏ ⲛ̀ⲥⲱϯ ⲛ̀ϣⲉⲃⲓⲱ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩⲙⲏϣ.
45 لِأَنَّ ابْنَ الْإِنْسَانِ أَيْضًا لَمْ يَأتِ لِيُخْدَمَ بَلْ لِيَخْدِمَ وَلِيَبْذِلَ نَفْسَهُ فِدْيَةً عَنْ كَثِيرِينَ ".