Stand in the fear of God and listen to the Holy Gospel. A reading from the Gospel according to our teacher Saint Matthew the Evangelist, and the pure disciple. May his blessings be with us all.
قِفُوا بِخَوْفِ اللهِ، وَأَنْصِتُوا لِسَمَاعِ الإِنْجِيلِ الْمُقَدَّسِ. فَصْلٌ مِنْ بِشَارَةِ الإِنْجِيلِ لِمُعَلِّمِنَا مَارْ متى الْبَشِيرِ، التِّلْمِيذِ الطَّاهِرِ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
From the Psalms of our teacher David the prophet. May his blessings be with us all.
مِنْ مَزَامِيرِ تَرَاتِيلِ مُعَلِّمِنَا دَاوُدَ النَّبِيِّ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
Matins Psalm
المزمور
	Psalms 145:1, 4
(مزامير 145: 1, 4)
Praise the Lord! Praise the Lord, O my soul! Happy is he who has the God of Jacob for his help, Whose hope is in the Lord his God.
Ⲧⲁⲯⲩⲭⲏ ⲥ̀ⲙⲟⲩ ⲉ̀Ⲡⲟ︦ⲥ︦: ϯⲛⲁⲥ̀ⲙⲟⲩ ⲉ̀Ⲡⲟ︦ⲥ︦ ϧⲉⲛ ⲡⲁⲱⲛϧ: ⲱ̀ⲟⲩⲛⲓⲁⲧϥ ⲙ̀ⲫⲏ ⲉ̀ⲧⲉ Ⲫϯ ⲛ̀Ⲓⲁⲕⲱⲃ ⲡⲉ ⲡⲉϥⲃⲟⲏ̀ⲑⲟⲥ: ⲉ̀ⲣⲉ ⲧⲉϥϩⲉⲗⲡⲓⲥ ϧⲉⲛ Ⲡⲟ︦ⲥ︦ ⲡⲉϥⲛⲟⲩϯ. ⲁ︦ⲗ︦.
سَبِّحِي يَا نَفْسِي الرَّبَّ. أُسَبِّحُ الرَّبَّ في حَيَاتِي. طُوبَى لِمَنْ إلهُ يَعْقُوبَ مُعِينُهُ. وَاتِّكَالُهُ عَلَى الرَّبِّ إلهِهِ.
People:
Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
الليلويا.
	Psalm Trailer for the Pope or a Bishop
(Ⲙⲁⲣⲟⲩϭⲁⲥϥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲧ̀ⲉⲕⲕ̀ⲗⲏⲥⲓⲁ̀...)
People:
Amen Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲙⲏⲛ Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
امين الليلويا.
Then the introduction to the Gospel is read.
ثم تقال مقدمة الأنجيل وهي:
Reader:
Blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord. Our Lord, God, Savior and King of us all, Jesus Christ, Son of the living God to whom is glory forever. Amen.
القارﺉُ:
مباركٌ الآتي باسمِ الربِّ إلهِ القواتِ، ربُّنا وإلهُنا ومخلصُنا وملكُنا كلِّنا، يسوعُ المسيحُ، ابنُ اللهِ الحيِّ، الذي لهُ المجدُ إلى الأبدِ. آمين.
Matins Gospel
الإنجيل
	Matthew 4:18-22
(متى 4: 18-22)
18 And Jesus, walking by the Sea of Galilee, saw two brothers, Simon called Peter, and Andrew his brother, casting a net into the sea; for they were fishermen.
Ⲉϥⲙⲟϣⲓ ⲇⲉ ⲉ̀ⲥ̀ⲕⲉⲛ ⲫ̀ⲓⲟⲙ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ϯⲄⲁⲗⲓⲗⲉⲁ̀ ⲁϥⲛⲁⲩ ⲉ̀ⲥⲟⲛ ⲃ︦ Ⲥⲓⲙⲱⲛ ⲫⲏⲉ̀ⲧⲟⲩⲙⲟⲩϯ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟϥ ϫⲉ Ⲡⲉⲧⲣⲟⲥ ⲛⲉⲙ Ⲁⲛⲇ̀ⲣⲉⲁⲥ ⲡⲉϥⲥⲟⲛ ⲉⲩϩⲓ ϣ̀ⲛⲉ ⲉ̀ⲫ̀ⲓⲟⲙ ⲛⲉ ϩⲁⲛⲟⲩⲟ̀ϩⲓ ⲅⲁⲣ ⲛⲉ.
18 وَإذْ كَانَ مَاشِيًا عَلَى شَاطِئِ بَحْرِ الْجَلِيلِ أَبْصَرَ أَخَوَيْنِ: سِمْعَانَ الَّذِي يُقَالُ لَهُ بُطْرُسُ، وَأَنْدَرَاوُسَ أَخَاهُ يُلْقِيَانِ شَبَكَةً في الْبَحْرِ، فَإِنَّهُمَا كَانَا صَيَّادَيْنِ.
19 Then He said to them, “Follow Me, and I will make you fishers of men.”
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ⲛⲱⲟⲩ ϫⲉ ⲁ̀ⲙⲱⲓⲛⲓ ⲙⲟϣⲓ ⲛ̀ⲥⲱⲓ ⲛ̀ⲧⲁⲉⲣ ⲑⲏⲛⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩⲟ̀ϩⲓ ⲛ̀ⲣⲉϥⲧⲁϩⲉ ⲣⲱⲙⲓ.
19 فَقَالَ لَهُمَا: " هَلُمَّ اتْبَعَانِي فَأَجْعَلُكُمَا صَيَّادَيِ النَّاسِ ".
20 They immediately left their nets and followed Him.
Ⲛ̀ⲑⲱⲟⲩ ⲇⲉ ⲥⲁⲧⲟⲧⲟⲩ ⲁⲩⲭⲱ ⲛ̀ⲛⲟⲩϣ̀ⲛⲏⲟⲩ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁⲩⲙⲟϣⲓ ⲛ̀ⲥⲱϥ.
20 فَلِلْوَقْتِ تَرَكَا شِبَاكَهُمَا وَتَبِعَاهُ.
21 Going on from there, He saw two other brothers, James the son of Zebedee, and John his brother, in the boat with Zebedee their father, mending their nets. He called them,
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉ̀ⲧⲁϥⲥⲓⲛⲓ ⲉ̀ⲧ̀ϩⲏ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ⲙ̀ⲙⲁⲩ ⲁϥⲛⲁⲩ ⲉ̀ⲕⲉⲥⲟⲛ ⲃ︦ Ⲓⲁⲕⲱⲃⲟⲥ ⲡ̀ϣⲏⲣⲓ ⲛ̀Ⲍⲉⲃⲉⲇⲉⲟⲥ ⲛⲉⲙ Ⲓⲱⲁⲛⲛⲏⲥ ⲡⲉϥⲥⲟⲛ ⲉⲩϩⲓ ⲡⲓϫⲟⲓ ⲛⲉⲙ Ⲍⲉⲃⲉⲇⲉⲟⲥ ⲡⲟⲩⲓⲱⲧ ⲉⲩⲥⲟⲃϯ ⲛ̀ⲛⲟⲩϣ̀ⲛⲏⲟⲩ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁϥⲙⲟⲩϯ ⲉ̀ⲣⲱⲟⲩ.
21 ثُمَّ اجْتَازَ إِلَى قُدَّامٍ مِنْ هُنَاكَ، فَرَأَى أَخَوَيْنِ آخَرَيْنِ: يَعْقُوبَ بْنَ زَبْدِي وَيُوحَنَّا أَخَاهُ في السَّفِينَةِ مَعَ زَبْدِي أبِيهِمَا يُصْلِحَانِ شِبَاكَهُمَا فَدَعَاهُمَا.
22 and immediately they left the boat and their father, and followed Him.
Ⲛ̀ⲑⲱⲟⲩ ⲇⲉ ⲥⲁⲧⲟⲧⲟⲩ ⲁⲩⲭⲱ ⲙ̀ⲡⲓϫⲟⲓ ⲛⲉⲙ Ⲍⲉⲃⲉⲇⲉⲟⲥ ⲡⲟⲩⲓⲱⲧ ⲁⲩⲙⲟϣⲓ ⲛ̀ⲥⲱϥ.
22 فَلِلْوَقْتِ تَرَكَا السَّفِينَةَ وَأَبَاهُمَا زَبْدِي وَتَبِعَاهُ.