Stand in the fear of God and listen to the Holy Gospel. A reading from the Gospel according to our teacher Saint Mark the Evangelist, and the pure disciple. May his blessings be with us all.
قِفُوا بِخَوْفِ اللهِ، وَأَنْصِتُوا لِسَمَاعِ الإِنْجِيلِ الْمُقَدَّسِ. فَصْلٌ مِنْ بِشَارَةِ الإِنْجِيلِ لِمُعَلِّمِنَا مَارْ مرقس الْبَشِيرِ، التِّلْمِيذِ الطَّاهِرِ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
From the Psalms of our teacher David the prophet. May his blessings be with us all.
مِنْ مَزَامِيرِ تَرَاتِيلِ مُعَلِّمِنَا دَاوُدَ النَّبِيِّ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
Vespers Psalm
المزمور
	Psalms 45:1,7
(مزامير 45: 1,7)
God is our refuge and strength, A very present help in trouble. The Lord of hosts is with us; The God of Jacob is our refuge.
Ⲡⲉⲛⲛⲟⲩϯ ⲡⲉ ⲡⲉⲛⲙⲁⲙ̀ⲫⲱⲧ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲧⲉⲛϫⲟⲙ: ⲡⲉⲛⲃⲟⲏ̀ⲑⲟⲥ ⲡⲉ ϧⲉⲛ ⲛⲉⲛⲑ̀ⲗⲩⲯⲓⲥ ⲉ̀ⲧⲁⲩϫⲉⲙⲧⲉⲛ ⲉ̀ⲙⲁϣⲱ: Ⲡⲟ︦ⲥ︦ Ⲫϯ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲛⲓϫⲟⲙ ⲁϥⲭⲏ ⲛⲉⲙⲁⲛ: ⲡⲉⲛⲣⲉϥϣⲟⲡⲧⲉⲛ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟϥ ⲡⲉ Ⲫϯ ⲛ̀Ⲓⲁⲕⲱⲃ. ⲁ︦ⲗ︦.
إلَهُنَا هُوَ مَلْجَأُنَا وَقُوَّتُنَا، وَمُعِينُنَا في شَدَائِدِنَا الَّتِي أصَابَتْنَا جِدًّا. الرَّبُّ إلهُ الْقُوَّاتِ مَعَنا. نَاصِرُنَا هُوَ إلهُ يَعْقُوبَ. هَلِّلُويَا.
People:
Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
الليلويا.
	Psalm Trailer for the Pope or a Bishop
(Ⲙⲁⲣⲟⲩϭⲁⲥϥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲧ̀ⲉⲕⲕ̀ⲗⲏⲥⲓⲁ̀...)
People:
Amen Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲙⲏⲛ Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
امين الليلويا.
Then the introduction to the Gospel is read.
ثم تقال مقدمة الأنجيل وهي:
Reader:
Blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord. Our Lord, God, Savior and King of us all, Jesus Christ, Son of the living God to whom is glory forever. Amen.
القارﺉُ:
مباركٌ الآتي باسمِ الربِّ إلهِ القواتِ، ربُّنا وإلهُنا ومخلصُنا وملكُنا كلِّنا، يسوعُ المسيحُ، ابنُ اللهِ الحيِّ، الذي لهُ المجدُ إلى الأبدِ. آمين.
Vespers Gospel
الإنجيل
	Mark 1:16-22
(مرقس 1: 16-22)
16 And as He walked by the Sea of Galilee, He saw Simon and Andrew his brother casting a net into the sea; for they were fishermen.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉ̀ⲧⲁϥⲥⲓⲛⲓ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ⲉ̀ⲥ̀ⲕⲉⲛ ⲫ̀ⲓⲟⲙ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ϯⲄⲁⲗⲓⲗⲉⲁ̀ ⲁϥⲛⲁⲩ ⲉ̀Ⲥⲓⲙⲱⲛ ⲛⲉⲙ Ⲁⲛⲇ̀ⲣⲉⲁⲥ ⲡ̀ⲥⲟⲛ ⲛ̀Ⲥⲓⲙⲱⲛ ⲉⲩϩⲓϣ̀ⲛⲉ ⲛ̀ⲥⲓϯ ⲉ̀ⲫ̀ⲓⲟⲙ ϫⲉ ⲟⲩⲏⲓ ⲅⲁⲣ ⲛⲉ ϩⲁⲛⲟⲩⲟ̀ϩⲓ ⲛⲉ.
16 وَفِيمَا هُوَ يَجْتَازُ عِنْدَ شَاطِئِ بَحْرِ الْجَلِيلِ أَبْصَرَ سِمْعَانَ وَأَنْدَرَاوُسَ أَخَاهُ يُلْقِيَانِ شَبَكَةً في الْبَحْرِ، فَإِنَّهُمَا كَانَا صَيَّادَيْنِ.
17 Then Jesus said to them, “Follow Me, and I will make you become fishers of men.”
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ⲛⲱⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ Ⲓⲏ︦ⲥ︦ ϫⲉ ⲁ̀ⲙⲱⲓⲛⲓ ⲙⲟϣⲓ ⲛ̀ⲥⲱⲓ ⲛ̀ⲧⲁⲉⲣ ⲑⲏⲛⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ϩⲁⲛⲟⲩⲟ̀ϩⲓ ⲛ̀ⲣⲉϥⲧⲁϩⲉⲣⲱⲙⲓ.
17 فَقَالَ لَهُمَا يَسُوعُ: " هَلُمَّ وَرَائِي فَأَجْعَلُكُمَا تَصِيرَانِ صَيَّادَيِ النَّاسِ ".
18 They immediately left their nets and followed Him.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁⲩⲭⲁ ⲛⲟⲩϣ̀ⲛⲏⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ⲥⲱⲟⲩ ⲥⲁⲧⲟⲧⲟⲩ ⲁⲩⲙⲟϣⲓ ⲛ̀ⲥⲱϥ.
18 فَلِلْوَقْتِ تَرَكَا شِبَاكَهُمَا وَتَبِعَاهُ.
19 When He had gone a little farther from there, He saw James the son of Zebedee, and John his brother, who also were in the boat mending their nets.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉ̀ⲧⲁϥⲥⲓⲛⲓ ⲉⲧϩⲏ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩⲕⲟⲩϫⲓ ⲁϥⲛⲁⲩ ⲉ̀Ⲓⲁⲕⲱⲃⲟⲥ ⲡ̀ϣⲏⲣⲓ ⲛ̀Ⲍⲉⲃⲉⲇⲉⲟⲥ ⲛⲉⲙ Ⲓⲱⲁⲛⲛⲏⲥ ⲡⲉϥⲥⲟⲛ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛ̀ⲑⲱⲟⲩ ϩⲱⲟⲩ ⲉⲩϩⲓ ⲡⲓϫⲟⲓ ⲉⲩⲥⲟⲃϯ ⲛ̀ⲛⲟⲩϣ̀ⲛⲏⲟⲩ.
19 ثُمَّ اجْتَازَ قَلِيلًا إِلَى قُدَّامٍ فَرَأَى يَعْقُوبَ بْنَ زَبْدِي وَيُوحَنَّا أَخَاهُ، وَهُمَا في السَّفِينَةِ يُصْلِحَانِ شِبَاكَهُمَا.
20 And immediately He called them, and they left their father Zebedee in the boat with the hired servants, and went after Him.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲥⲁⲧⲟⲧϥ ⲁϥⲙⲟⲩϯ ⲉ̀ⲣⲱⲟⲩ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁⲩⲭⲁ ⲡⲟⲩⲓⲱⲧ ⲛ̀ⲥⲱⲟⲩ Ⲍⲉⲃⲉⲇⲉⲟⲥ ϩⲓⲡⲓϫⲟⲓ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲛⲓⲙⲩⲥⲑⲱⲧⲏⲥ ⲁⲩϣⲉⲛⲱⲟⲩ ⲁⲩⲙⲟϣⲓ ⲛ̀ⲥⲱϥ.
20 فَدَعَاهُمَا لِلْوَقْتِ. فَتَرَكَا أَبَاهُمَا زَبْدِي في السَّفِينَةِ مَعَ الأَجْرَى وَذَهَبَا وَرَاءَهُ.
21 Then they went into Capernaum, and immediately on the Sabbath He entered the synagogue and taught.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁⲩϣⲉⲛⲱⲟⲩ ⲉ̀ϧⲟⲩⲛ ⲉ̀Ⲕⲁⲫⲁⲣⲛⲁⲟⲩⲙ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲥⲁⲧⲟⲧϥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲡⲓⲥⲁⲃⲃⲁⲧⲟⲛ ⲉ̀ⲧⲁϥϣⲉ ⲉ̀ϧⲟⲩⲛ ⲛⲁϥϯⲥ̀ⲃⲱ ϧⲉⲛ ϯⲥⲩⲛⲁⲅⲱⲅⲏ.
21 ثُمَّ دَخَلُوا كَفْرَنَاحُومَ، وَلِلْوَقْتِ دَخَلَ الْمَجْمَعَ في السَّبْتِ وَصَارَ يُعَلِّمُ.
22 And they were astonished at His teaching, for He taught them as one having authority, and not as the scribes.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛⲁⲩⲉⲣϣ̀ⲫⲏⲣⲓ ⲉ̀ϫⲉⲛ ⲧⲉϥⲥ̀ⲃⲱ ⲛⲁϥϯⲥ̀ⲃⲱ ⲅⲁⲣ ⲛⲱⲟⲩ ⲡⲉ ϩⲱⲥ ⲉ̀ⲣⲉ ⲡⲉϥⲉⲣϣⲓϣⲓ ⲛ̀ⲧⲟⲧϥ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲙ̀ⲫ̀ⲣⲏϯ ⲁⲛ ⲛ̀ⲛⲓⲥⲁϧ.
22 فَبُهِتُوا مِنْ تَعْلِيمِهِ لِأَنَّهُ كَانَ يُعَلِّمُهُمْ كَمَنْ لَهُ سُلْطَانٌ وَلَيْسَ كَالْكَتَبَةِ.