Stand in the fear of God and listen to the Holy Gospel. A reading from the Gospel according to our teacher Saint Luke the Evangelist, and the pure disciple. May his blessings be with us all.
قِفُوا بِخَوْفِ اللهِ، وَأَنْصِتُوا لِسَمَاعِ الإِنْجِيلِ الْمُقَدَّسِ. فَصْلٌ مِنْ بِشَارَةِ الإِنْجِيلِ لِمُعَلِّمِنَا مَارْ لوقا الْبَشِيرِ، التِّلْمِيذِ الطَّاهِرِ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
From the Psalms of our teacher David the prophet. May his blessings be with us all.
مِنْ مَزَامِيرِ تَرَاتِيلِ مُعَلِّمِنَا دَاوُدَ النَّبِيِّ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
Matins Psalm
المزمور
	Psalms 67:19, 35
(مزامير 67: 19, 35)
Blessed be the Lord, Who daily loads us with benefits. The God of Israel is He who gives strength and power to His people. Blessed be God!
Ϥⲥ̀ⲙⲁⲣⲱⲟⲩⲧ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ Ⲡ̀ⲟ︦ⲥ︦ Ⲫⲛⲟⲩϯ: ϥ̀ⲥ̀ⲙⲁⲣⲱⲟⲩⲧ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ Ⲡ̀ⲟ︦ⲥ︦ ⲙ̀ⲙⲏⲓⲛⲓ ⲙ̀ⲙⲏⲛⲓ: Ⲫⲛⲟⲩϯ ⲙ̀ⲡⲒⲥⲣⲁⲏⲗ ⲛ̀ⲑⲟϥ ⲉϥⲉ̀ϯ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩϫⲟⲙ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲟⲩⲁ̀ⲙⲁϩⲓ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉϥⲗⲁⲟⲥ: ϥ̀ⲥ̀ⲙⲁⲣⲱⲟⲩⲧ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ Ⲫⲛⲟⲩϯ. ⲁ︦ⲗ︦.
مُباركٌ الربُّ الإلهُ، مُباركٌ الربُّ يوماً فيوماً. إلهُ إسرائيلَ هو يُعطي قوَّةً وعِزَّاً لشعبِهِ، مُباركٌ هُو اللَّهِ.
People:
Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
الليلويا.
	Psalm Trailer for the Pope or a Bishop
(Ⲙⲁⲣⲟⲩϭⲁⲥϥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲧ̀ⲉⲕⲕ̀ⲗⲏⲥⲓⲁ̀...)
People:
Amen Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲙⲏⲛ Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
امين الليلويا.
Then the introduction to the Gospel is read.
ثم تقال مقدمة الأنجيل وهي:
Reader:
Blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord. Our Lord, God, Savior and King of us all, Jesus Christ, Son of the living God to whom is glory forever. Amen.
القارﺉُ:
مباركٌ الآتي باسمِ الربِّ إلهِ القواتِ، ربُّنا وإلهُنا ومخلصُنا وملكُنا كلِّنا، يسوعُ المسيحُ، ابنُ اللهِ الحيِّ، الذي لهُ المجدُ إلى الأبدِ. آمين.
Matins Gospel
الإنجيل
	Luke 19:1-10
(لوقا 19: 1-10)
1 Then Jesus entered and passed through Jericho.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉⲧⲁϥϣⲉ ⲉ̀ϧⲟⲩⲛ ⲛⲁϥⲙⲟϣⲓ ⲡⲉ ϧⲉⲛ ⲓⲉⲣⲓⲭⲱ.
1 وَلَمَّا دَخَلَ كَانَ يَمْشِي فِي أَرِيحَا.
2 Now behold, there was a man named Zacchaeus who was a chief tax collector, and he was rich.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲓⲥ ⲟⲩⲣⲱⲙⲓ ⲉⲩⲙⲟⲩϯ ⲉⲡⲉϥⲣⲁⲛ ϫⲉ ⲍⲁⲕⲭⲉⲟⲥ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲫⲁⲓ ⲛⲉ ⲟⲩⲁⲣⲭⲓⲧⲉⲗⲱⲛⲏ ⲥ ⲡⲉ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛⲉ ⲟⲩⲣⲁⲙⲁⲟ̀ ⲡⲉ.
2 وَإِذَا رَجُلٌ يُدْعَى اسْمُهُ زَكَّا، وَهَذَا كَانَ رَئِيسًا لِلْعَشَّارِينَ وَكَانَ غَنِيًّا،
3 And he sought to see who Jesus was, but could not because of the crowd, for he was of short stature.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛⲁϥⲕⲱϯ ⲡⲉ ⲉ̀ⲛⲁⲩ ⲉ̀Ⲓⲏ︦ⲥ︦ ϫⲉ ⲛⲓⲙ ⲡⲉ ⲩⲟϩ ⲛⲁϥϣ̀ϫⲉⲙϫⲟⲙ ⲁⲛ ⲡⲉ ⲉⲑⲃⲉ ⲡⲓⲙⲏϣ ϫⲉ ⲛⲉ ⲟⲩⲕⲟⲩϫⲓ ⲡⲉ ϧⲉⲛ ⲧⲉϥⲙⲁⲓⲏ.
3 وَكَانَ يَطْلُبُ مُرِيدًا أَنْ يَرَى يَسُوعَ مَنْ هُوَ، وَلَمْ يَقْدِرْ بِسَبَبِ الْجَمْعِ، لِأَنَّهُ كَانَ قَصِيرًا في قَامَتِهِ.
4 So he ran ahead and climbed up into a sycamore tree to see Him, for He was going to pass that way.
Ⲉⲧⲁϥϭⲟϫⲓ ⲉ̀ⲧ̀ϩⲏ ⲁϥϣⲉ ⲛⲁϥ ⲉ̀ϩ̀ⲣⲏⲓ ⲉ̀ϫⲉⲛ ⲩⲥⲩⲕⲟⲙⲟⲣⲉⲁ̀ ϩⲓⲛⲁ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉϥⲛⲁⲩ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟϥ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛⲁϥⲥⲓⲛⲓ ⲡⲉ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ϩⲓⲧⲟⲧⲥ.
4 فَأَسْرَعَ إِلَى قُدَّامٍ وَصَعِدَ إِلَى جُمَّيْزَةٍ لِكَيْ يَرَاهُ، لِأَنَّهُ كَانَ مُجْتَازًا مِنْ جِهَتِهَا.
5 And when Jesus came to the place, He looked up and saw him, and said to him, “Zacchaeus, make haste and come down, for today I must stay at your house.”
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉⲧⲁϥⲓ̀ ⲉ̀ϫⲉⲛ ⲡⲓⲙⲁ ⲁϥⲥⲟⲙⲥ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟϥ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ Ⲓⲏ︦ⲥ︦ ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ⲁϥ ϫⲉ ⲍⲁⲕⲭⲉⲟⲥ ⲭⲱⲗⲉⲙ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲕ ⲁ̀ⲙⲟⲩ ⲉⲡⲉⲥⲏⲧ ⲙ̀ⲫⲟⲟⲩ ⲅⲁⲣ ϩⲱϯ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟⲓ ⲛ̀ⲧⲁϣⲱⲡⲓ ϧⲉⲛ ⲡⲉⲕⲏⲓ.
5 فَلَمَّا جَاءَ يَسُوعُ إِلَى الْمَوْضِعِ، نَظَرَ إِلَيْهِ وَقَالَ لَهُ: " يَا زَكَّا، أَسْرِعْ وَانْزِلْ، لِأَنَّهُ يَنْبَغِي أَنْ أَكُونَ اليَوْمَ فِي بَيْتِكَ ".
6 So he made haste and came down, and received Him joyfully.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁϥⲭⲱⲗⲉⲙ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟϥ ⲁϥⲓ̀ ⲉⲡⲉⲥⲏ ⲧ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁϥϣⲟⲡϥ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟϥ ⲉϥⲣⲁϣⲓ.
6 فَأَسْرَعَ وَنَزَلَ إِلَيْهِ وَقَبِلَهُ فَرِحًا.
7 But when they saw it, they all complained, saying, “He has gone to be a guest with a man who is a sinner.”
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛⲏ ⲧⲏⲣⲟⲩ ⲉⲧⲁⲩⲛⲁⲩ ⲁⲩⲉⲣⲭ̀ ⲣⲉⲙⲣⲉⲙ ⲉⲩϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ϫⲉ ⲁϥϣⲉ ⲛⲁϥ ⲉ̀ϧⲟⲩⲛ ⲉ̀ⲡ̀ⲏⲓ ⲛⲟⲩⲣⲉϥⲉⲣⲛⲟⲃⲓ ⲛ̀ⲣⲱⲙⲓ ⲉ̀ⲙ̀ⲧⲟⲛ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟϥ.
7 فَلَمَّا رَأَى الْجَمِيعُ ( ذلِكَ ) تَذَمَّرُوا قَائِلِينَ: " إِنَّهُ دَخَلَ إِلَى بَيْتِ رَجُلٍ خَاطِئٍ لِيَسْتَريحَ ".
8 Then Zacchaeus stood and said to the Lord, “Look, Lord, I give half of my goods to the poor; and if I have taken anything from anyone by false accusation, I restore fourfold.”
Ⲁϥⲟϩⲓ ⲉ̀ⲣⲁⲧϥ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲍⲁⲕⲭⲉⲟⲥ ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ⲙ̀Ⲡⲟ︦ⲥ︦ ϫⲉ Ⲡⲟ︦ⲥ︦ ϩⲏⲡⲡⲉ ϯϯ ⲛ̀ⲧ̀ⲫⲁϣⲓ ⲛ̀ⲛⲁϩⲩⲡⲁⲣⲭ ⲟⲛⲧⲁ ⲛ̀ⲛⲓϩⲏⲕⲓ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲫⲏⲉⲧⲁⲓϭⲓⲧϥ ⲛ̀ϫⲟⲛⲥ ⲛ̀ϩ̀ⲗⲓ ϯⲛⲁⲕⲟⲃⲟⲩ ⲛⲁϥ ⲛ̀ⲇ︦ ⲛ̀ⲕⲱⲃ.
8 فَوَقَفَ زَكَّا وَقَالَ لِلرَّبِّ: " يَا رَبُّ هَأَنَذَا أُعْطِي نِصْفَ أَمْوَالِي لِلْفُقَرَاءِ، وَمَنْ ظَلَمْتُهُ شَيئًا أُعَوِّضْهُ أَرْبَعَةَ أَضْعَافٍ ".
9 And Jesus said to him, “Today salvation has come to this house, because he also is a son of Abraham;
Ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ⲇⲉ ⲛⲁϥ ϫⲉ ⲙ̀ⲫⲟⲟⲩ ⲡ̀ⲟⲩϫⲁⲓ ϣⲱⲡⲓ ϧⲉⲛ ⲁⲓⲏⲓ ϫⲉ ⲛ̀ⲑⲟϥ ϩⲱϥ ⲟⲩϣⲏⲣⲓ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲁⲃⲣⲁⲁⲙ ⲡⲉ.
9 فَقَالَ لَهُ يَسُوعُ: " اليَوْمَ صَارَ الْخَلَاصُ لِهَذَا الْبَيْتِ، فَإِنَّهُ هُوَ أَيْضًا اِبْنُ إِبْرَاهِيمَ،
10 for the Son of Man has come to seek and to save that which was lost.”
Ⲁϥⲓ̀ ⲅⲁⲣ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲡ̀ϣⲏⲣⲓ ⲙ̀ⲫ̀ⲣⲱⲙⲓ ⲉ̀ⲕⲱϯ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉ̀ⲛⲟϩⲉⲙ ⲙ̀ⲫⲏⲉⲧⲁϥⲧⲁⲕⲟ.
10 لِأَنَّ ابْنَ الْإِنْسَانِ جَاءَ لِيَطْلُبَ وَيُخَلِّصَ الَّذِي قَدْ هَلَكَ ".