Stand in the fear of God and listen to the Holy Gospel. A reading from the Gospel according to our teacher Saint Luke the Evangelist, and the pure disciple. May his blessings be with us all.
قِفُوا بِخَوْفِ اللهِ، وَأَنْصِتُوا لِسَمَاعِ الإِنْجِيلِ الْمُقَدَّسِ. فَصْلٌ مِنْ بِشَارَةِ الإِنْجِيلِ لِمُعَلِّمِنَا مَارْ لوقا الْبَشِيرِ، التِّلْمِيذِ الطَّاهِرِ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
From the Psalms of our teacher David the prophet. May his blessings be with us all.
مِنْ مَزَامِيرِ تَرَاتِيلِ مُعَلِّمِنَا دَاوُدَ النَّبِيِّ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
Matins Psalm
المزمور
	Psalms 32:1,12
(مزامير 32: 1,12)
Rejoice in the Lord, O you righteous! For praise from the upright is beautiful. Blessed is the nation whose God is the Lord, The people He has chosen as His own inheritance.
Ⲑⲉⲗⲏⲗ ⲙ̀ⲙⲱⲧⲉⲛ ⲛⲓⲑ̀ⲙⲏⲓ ϧⲉⲛ Ⲡⲟ︦ⲥ︦: ⲛⲏⲉⲧⲥⲟⲩⲧⲱⲛ ϥ̀ⲉⲣϣⲁⲩ ⲛⲱⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲡⲓⲥ̀ⲙⲟⲩ: ⲱ̀ⲟⲩⲛⲓⲁⲧϥ ⲙ̀ⲡⲓϣ̀ⲗⲟⲗ ⲉ̀ⲧⲉ Ⲡⲟ︦ⲥ︦ ⲡⲉ ⲡⲉϥⲚⲟⲩϯ: ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ ⲉ̀ⲧⲁϥⲥⲟⲧⲡϥ ⲛⲁϥ ⲉⲩⲕ̀ⲗⲏⲣⲟⲛⲟⲙⲓⲁ̀. ⲁ︦ⲗ︦.
ابْتَهِجُوا أيُّهَا الصِّدِّيقُونَ بِالرَّبِّ. باِلْمُسْتَقِيمِينَ يَنْبَغِي التَّسْبِيحُ. طُوبَى لِلأُمَّةِ الَّتِي الرَّبُّ هُوَ إلهُهَا، وَالشَّعْبِ الَّذِي اخْتَارَهُ مِيرَاثًا لَهُ. هَلِّلُويَا.
People:
Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
الليلويا.
	Psalm Trailer for the Pope or a Bishop
(Ⲙⲁⲣⲟⲩϭⲁⲥϥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲧ̀ⲉⲕⲕ̀ⲗⲏⲥⲓⲁ̀...)
People:
Amen Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲙⲏⲛ Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
امين الليلويا.
Then the introduction to the Gospel is read.
ثم تقال مقدمة الأنجيل وهي:
Reader:
Blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord. Our Lord, God, Savior and King of us all, Jesus Christ, Son of the living God to whom is glory forever. Amen.
القارﺉُ:
مباركٌ الآتي باسمِ الربِّ إلهِ القواتِ، ربُّنا وإلهُنا ومخلصُنا وملكُنا كلِّنا، يسوعُ المسيحُ، ابنُ اللهِ الحيِّ، الذي لهُ المجدُ إلى الأبدِ. آمين.
Matins Gospel
الإنجيل
	Luke 19:11-19
(لوقا 19: 11-19)
11 Now as they heard these things, He spoke another parable, because He was near Jerusalem and because they thought the kingdom of God would appear immediately.
Ⲩⲥⲱⲧⲉⲙ ⲇⲉ ⲉ̀ⲛⲁⲓ ⲁϥⲟⲩⲁϩⲧⲟⲧϥ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲟⲩⲡⲁⲣⲁⲃⲟⲗⲏ ⲉⲑⲃⲉϫⲉ ⲛⲁϥϧⲉⲛⲧ ⲡⲉ ⲉ̀ⲓ̀ⲗ︦ⲏ︦ⲙ︦ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛⲁⲩⲙⲉⲩⲓ ϫⲉ ϯⲙⲉⲧⲟⲩⲣⲟ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲫϯ ⲛⲁⲟⲩⲱⲛϩ ⲉⲃⲟⲗ ⲥⲁⲧⲟⲧⲥ ⲡⲉ.
11 وَإذْ كَانُوا يَسْمَعُونَ هذَا عَادَ فَقَالَ مَثَلًا، لِأَنَّهُ كَانَ قَرِيبًا مِنْ أُورُشَلِيمَ، وَكَانُوا يَظُنُّونَ أَنَّ مَلَكُوتَ اللَّهِ عَتِيدٌ أَنْ يَظْهَرَ في الْحَالِ.
12 Therefore He said: “A certain nobleman went into a far country to receive for himself a kingdom and to return.
Ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ⲟⲩⲛ ϫⲉ ⲛⲉ ⲟⲩⲟⲛ ⲟⲩⲣⲱⲙⲓ ⲛ̀ⲉⲩⲅⲉⲛⲏⲥ ⲁϥϣⲉ ⲛⲁϥ ⲉ̀ⲟⲩⲭⲱⲣⲁ ⲉⲥⲟⲩⲏⲟⲩ ⲉ̀ϭⲓ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩⲙⲉⲧⲟⲩⲣⲟ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉⲧⲁⲥⲑⲟ.
12 فَقَالَ: " كَانَ إِنْسَانٌ شَرِيفُ الْجِنْسِ قَدْ ذَهَبَ إِلَى كُورَةٍ بَعِيدَةٍ لِيَأْخُذَ مُلْكًا لِنَفْسِهِ وَيَرْجِعَ.
13 So he called ten of his servants, delivered to them ten minas, and said to them, ‘Do business till I come.’
Ⲉⲧⲁϥⲙⲟⲩϯ ⲇⲉ ⲉ̀ⲓ︦ ⲙ̀ⲃⲱⲕ ⲛ̀ⲧⲁϥ ⲁϥϯ ⲙ̀ⲓ︦ ⲛ̀ⲉⲙⲛⲁ ⲛⲱⲟⲩ ⲉϥϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ϫⲉ ⲁⲣⲓⲓⲉⲃϣⲱⲧ ϧⲉⲛ ⲛⲁⲓ ϣⲁϯⲓ̀.
13 فَدَعَا عَشَرَةَ عَبِيدٍ لَهُ وَأَعْطَاهُمْ عَشَرَةَ أَمْنَاءٍ، قَائِلًا لَهُمْ: تَاجِرُوا في هذِهِ حَتَّى آتِيَ.
14 But his citizens hated him, and sent a delegation after him, saying, ‘We will not have this man to reign over us.’
Ⲉϥⲡⲟⲗⲓⲧⲏⲥ ⲇⲉ ⲛⲁⲩⲙⲟⲥϯ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟϥ ⲡⲉ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁⲩⲟⲩⲱⲣⲡ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩⲡ̀ⲣⲉⲥⲃⲓⲁ̀ ⲥⲁⲫⲁϩⲟⲩ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟϥ ⲉⲩϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ϫⲉ ⲧⲉⲛⲟⲩⲉϣ ⲫⲁⲓ ⲁⲛ ⲉⲑⲣⲉϥⲉⲣⲟⲩⲣⲟ ⲉϩ̀ⲣⲏⲓ ⲉ̀ϫⲱⲛ.
14 وَأمَّا أَهْلُ مَدِينَتِهِ فَكَانُوا يُبْغِضُونَهُ، فَأَرْسَلُوا وَرَاءَهُ سَفَارَةً قَائِلِينَ: لَا نُرِيدُ أَنَّ هذَا يَمْلِكُ عَلَيْنَا.
15 “And so it was that when he returned, having received the kingdom, he then commanded these servants, to whom he had given the money, to be called to him, that he might know how much every man had gained by trading.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁⲥϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲉⲧⲁϥⲧⲁⲥⲑⲟ ⲉ̀ⲁϥϭⲓ ⲛ̀ϯⲙⲉⲧⲟⲩⲣⲟ ⲁϥϫⲟⲥ ⲉⲑⲣⲟⲩⲙⲟⲩϯ ⲉ̀ⲛⲓⲉ̀ⲃⲓⲁⲓⲕ ⲛⲁⲓ ⲉⲧⲁϥϯ ⲙ̀ⲡⲓϩⲁⲧ ⲛⲱⲟⲩ ⲓⲛⲁ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉϥⲉ̀ⲙⲓ ϫⲉ ⲟⲩ ⲙ̀ⲙⲉⲧⲓⲉⲃϣⲱⲧ ⲉⲧⲁⲩⲁⲓⲥ.
15 وَلَمَّا رَجَعَ بَعْدَمَا أَخَذَ الْمُلْكَ، قَالَ أَنْ يُدْعَى إلَيْهِ الْعَبِيدُ الَّذِينَ أَعْطَاهُمُ الْفِضَّةَ، لِيَعْلَمَ بِمَا تَاجَرَ كُلُّ وَاحِدٍ.
16 Then came the first, saying, ‘Master, your mina has earned ten minas.’
Ⲁϥⲓ̀ ⲇⲉ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲡⲓϩⲟⲩⲓⲧ ⲉϥϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ϫⲉ ⲡⲁϫ︦ⲥ︦ ⲁ ⲡⲉⲕⲉⲙⲛⲁ ⲁϥⲉⲣ ⲓ︦ ⲛ̀ⲉⲙⲛⲁ.
16 فَجَاءَ الأَوَّلُ قَائِلًا: يَا سَيِّدِي، مَنَاكَ رَبِحَ عَشَرَةَ أَمْنَاءٍ.
17 And he said to him, ‘Well done, good servant; because you were faithful in a very little, have authority over ten cities.’
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ⲛⲁϥ ϫⲉ ⲕⲁⲗⲱⲥ ⲡⲓⲃⲱⲕ ⲉⲑⲛⲁⲛⲉϥ ⲉⲑⲃⲉϫⲉ ⲁⲕϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲉⲕⲉⲛϩⲟⲧ ϧⲉⲛ ϩⲁⲛⲕⲟⲩϫⲓ ϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲉ̀ⲟⲩⲟⲛⲧⲉⲕ ⲉⲣϣⲓϣⲓ ⲙⲙⲁⲩ ⲉϫⲉⲛ ⲓ︦ ⲙ̀ⲃⲁⲕⲓ.
17 فَقَالَ لَهُ: نِعِمَّا أيُّهَا الْعَبْدُ الصَّالِحُ، لِأَنَّكَ كُنْتَ أَمِينًا في الْقَلِيلِ، فَلْيَكُنْ لَكَ سُلْطَانٌ عَلَى عَشْرِ مُدْنٍ.
18 And the second came, saying, ‘Master, your mina has earned five minas.’
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁϥⲓ̀ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲡⲓⲙⲁϩⲃ︦ ⲉϥϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ϫⲉ ⲡⲁϫ︦ⲥ︦ ⲁ ⲡⲉⲕⲙ̀ⲛⲁ ⲁϥⲉⲣ ⲉ︦ ⲛ̀ⲙ̀ⲛⲁ.
18 ثُمَّ جَاءَ الثَّانِي قَائِلًا: يَا سَيِّدِي، مَنَاكَ قَدْ رَبِحَ خَمْسَةَ أَمْنَاءٍ.
19 Likewise he said to him, ‘You also be over five cities.’
Ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ⲇⲉ ⲟⲛ ⲙ̀ⲡⲁⲓⲭⲉⲧ ⲉ ⲱⲡⲓ ϩⲱⲕ ⲉ̀ϫⲉⲛ ⲉ︦ ⲙ̀ⲃⲁⲕⲓ.
19 فَقَالَ لِهذَا أَيْضًا: وَكُنْ أَنْتَ عَلَى خَمْسِ مُدْنٍ ".