Stand in the fear of God and listen to the Holy Gospel. A reading from the Gospel according to our teacher Saint Luke the Evangelist, and the pure disciple. May his blessings be with us all.
قِفُوا بِخَوْفِ اللهِ، وَأَنْصِتُوا لِسَمَاعِ الإِنْجِيلِ الْمُقَدَّسِ. فَصْلٌ مِنْ بِشَارَةِ الإِنْجِيلِ لِمُعَلِّمِنَا مَارْ لوقا الْبَشِيرِ، التِّلْمِيذِ الطَّاهِرِ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
From the Psalms of our teacher David the prophet. May his blessings be with us all.
مِنْ مَزَامِيرِ تَرَاتِيلِ مُعَلِّمِنَا دَاوُدَ النَّبِيِّ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
Liturgy Psalm
المزمور
	Psalms 67:13
(مزامير 67: 13)
The Lord gave the word; Great was the company of those who proclaimed it: Kings of armies flee, they flee, And she who remains at home divides the spoil.
Ⲡⲟ︦ⲥ︦ ⲉϥⲉ̀ϯ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩⲥⲁϫⲓ ⲛ̀ⲛⲏⲉⲧϩⲓϣⲉⲛⲛⲟⲩϥⲓ: ϧⲉⲛ ⲟⲩⲛⲓϣϯ ⲛ̀ϫⲟⲙ: ⲡ̀ⲟⲩⲣⲟ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲛⲓϫⲟⲙ ⲡⲉ ⲡⲓⲙⲉⲛⲣⲓⲧ: ⲟⲩⲟϩ ϧⲉⲛ ⲡ̀ⲥⲁⲓ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲡ̀ⲏⲓ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲡⲓⲙⲉⲛⲣⲓⲧ ⲫⲱϣ ⲛ̀ϩⲁⲛϣⲱⲗ. ⲁ︦ⲗ︦.
الرَّبُّ يُعْطِي كَلِمَةً للمُبشِّرِينَ، بِقُوَّةٍ عَظِيمَةٍ. مَلِكُ القُوَّاتِ هُوَ الْمَحْبُوبُ، وفي بَهَاءِ بَيْتِ الْحَبيبِ أُقَسِّمُ الْغَنَائِمَ. هَلِّلُويَا.
People:
Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
الليلويا.
	Psalm Trailer for the Pope or a Bishop
(Ⲙⲁⲣⲟⲩϭⲁⲥϥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲧ̀ⲉⲕⲕ̀ⲗⲏⲥⲓⲁ̀...)
People:
Amen Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲙⲏⲛ Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
امين الليلويا.
Then the introduction to the Gospel is read.
ثم تقال مقدمة الأنجيل وهي:
Reader:
Blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord. Our Lord, God, Savior and King of us all, Jesus Christ, Son of the living God to whom is glory forever. Amen.
القارﺉُ:
مباركٌ الآتي باسمِ الربِّ إلهِ القواتِ، ربُّنا وإلهُنا ومخلصُنا وملكُنا كلِّنا، يسوعُ المسيحُ، ابنُ اللهِ الحيِّ، الذي لهُ المجدُ إلى الأبدِ. آمين.
Liturgy Gospel
الإنجيل
	Luke 5:27-32
(لوقا 5: 27-32)
27 After these things He went out and saw a tax collector named Levi, sitting at the tax office. And He said to him, “Follow Me.”
Ⲙⲉⲛⲉⲛⲥⲁ ⲛⲁⲓ ⲇⲉ ⲁϥⲓ̀ ⲉⲃⲟⲗ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁϥⲛⲁⲩ ⲉ̀ⲟⲩⲧⲉⲗⲱⲛⲏⲥ ⲉ̀ⲡⲉϥⲣⲁⲛ ⲡⲉ ⲗⲉⲩⲓ̀ ⲉϥϩⲉⲙⲥⲓ ϩⲓ ⲟⲩⲧⲉⲗⲱⲛⲓⲟⲛ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ⲛⲁϥ ϫⲉ ⲙⲟϣⲓ ⲛ̀ⲥⲱⲓ.
27 وَبَعْدَ هَذَا خَرَجَ يَسُوعُ فَنَظَرَ عَشَّارًا اسْمُهُ لَاوِي جَالِسًا عِنْدَ مَكَانِ الْجِبَايَةِ، فَقَالَ لَهُ: " اتْبَعْنِي ".
28 So he left all, rose up, and followed Him.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁϥⲭⲁ ϩⲱⲃ ⲛⲓⲃⲉⲛ ⲁϥⲧⲱⲛϥ ⲁϥⲙⲟϣⲓ ⲛ̀ⲥⲱϥ.
28 فَتَرَكَ كُلَّ شَيْءٍ وَقَامَ وَتَبِعَهُ.
29 Then Levi gave Him a great feast in his own house. And there were a great number of tax collectors and others who sat down with them.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲗⲉⲩⲓ̀ ⲁϥⲉⲣ ⲟⲩⲛⲓϣϯ ⲛ̀ϣⲟⲡⲥ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟϥ ⲛ̀ϧⲟⲩⲛ ϧⲉⲛ ⲡⲉϥⲏⲓ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛⲉ ⲟⲩⲟⲛ ⲟⲩⲛⲓϣϯ ⲙ̀ⲙⲏϣ ⲛⲧⲉ ⲛⲓⲧⲉⲗⲱⲛⲏⲥ ⲛⲉⲙ ϩⲁⲛⲕⲉⲭ ⲱⲟⲩⲛⲓ ⲉⲩⲣⲟⲧⲉⲃ ⲛⲉⲙⲱⲟⲩ.
29 وَصَنَعَ لَهُ لَاوِي وَلِيمَةً عَظِيمَةً في بَيْتِهِ. وَكَانَ جَمْعٌ عَظِيمٌ مِنَ الْعَشَّارِينَ وَآخَرِينَ مُتَّكِئِينَ مَعَهُمْ.
30 And their scribes and the Pharisees complained against His disciples, saying, “Why do You eat and drink with tax collectors and sinners?”
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛⲁⲩⲭ̀ⲣⲉⲙⲣⲉⲙ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲛⲓⲫⲁⲣⲓⲥⲉⲟⲥ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲛⲓⲥⲁϧ ⲟⲩⲃⲉ ⲛⲉϥⲙⲁⲑⲏⲧⲏⲥ ⲉⲩϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ϫⲉ ⲉⲑⲃⲉⲟⲩ ⲧⲉⲧⲉⲛⲟⲩⲱⲙ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲧⲉⲧⲉⲛⲥⲱ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲛⲓⲧⲉⲗⲱⲛⲏⲥ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲛⲓⲣⲉϥⲉⲣⲛⲟⲃⲓ.
30 فَتَذَمَّرَ الْفَرِّيسِيُّونَ وَالْكَتَبَةُ عَلَى تَلَامِيذِهِ قَائِلينَ: " لِمَاذَا تَأْكُلُونَ وَتَشْرَبُونَ مَعَ الْعَشَّارِينَ وَالْخُطَاةِ؟ ".
31 Jesus answered and said to them, “Those who are well have no need of a physician, but those who are sick.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁϥⲉⲣⲟⲩⲱ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ Ⲓⲏ︦ⲥ︦ ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ⲛⲱⲟⲩ ϫⲉ ⲛⲏⲉⲧϫⲟⲣ ⲥⲉⲉⲣⲭ̀ⲣⲓⲁ̀ ⲙ̀ⲡⲓⲥⲏⲓⲛⲓ ⲁⲛ ⲁⲗⲗⲁ ⲛⲏⲉⲑⲙⲟⲕϩ.
31 فَأجَابَ يَسُوعُ وَقَالَ لَهُمْ: " لَا يَحْتَاجُ الأقْوِيَاءُ إِلَى الطَّبِيبِ، بَلِ الْمُتَألِمُونَ.
32 I have not come to call the righteous, but sinners, to repentance.”
Ⲛⲉⲧⲁⲓⲓ̀ ⲅⲁⲣ ⲁⲛ ⲉ̀ⲑⲁϩⲉⲙ ⲛⲓⲑ̀ⲙⲏⲓ ⲁⲗⲗⲁ ⲛⲓⲣⲉϥⲉⲣⲛⲟⲃⲓ ⲩⲙⲉⲧⲁⲛⲟⲓⲁ̀.
32 لأنِّي لَمْ آتِ لِأَدْعُوَ الأبْرَارَ بَلِ الْخُطَاةَ إِلَى التَّوْبَةِ ".