Stand in the fear of God and listen to the Holy Gospel. A reading from the Gospel according to our teacher Saint Mark the Evangelist, and the pure disciple. May his blessings be with us all.
قِفُوا بِخَوْفِ اللهِ، وَأَنْصِتُوا لِسَمَاعِ الإِنْجِيلِ الْمُقَدَّسِ. فَصْلٌ مِنْ بِشَارَةِ الإِنْجِيلِ لِمُعَلِّمِنَا مَارْ مرقس الْبَشِيرِ، التِّلْمِيذِ الطَّاهِرِ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
From the Psalms of our teacher David the prophet. May his blessings be with us all.
مِنْ مَزَامِيرِ تَرَاتِيلِ مُعَلِّمِنَا دَاوُدَ النَّبِيِّ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
Matins Psalm
المزمور
	Psalms 39:8,9
(مزامير 39: 8,9)
I have proclaimed the good news of righteousness In the great assembly; Indeed, I do not restrain my lips, O Lord, You Yourself know. I have not hidden Your righteousness within my heart.
Ⲁⲓϩⲓϣⲉⲛⲛⲟⲩϥⲓ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉⲕⲙⲉⲑⲙⲏⲓ ϧⲉⲛ ⲟⲩⲛⲓϣϯ ⲛ̀ⲉⲕⲕ̀ⲗⲏⲥⲓⲁ̀: ϩⲏⲡⲡⲉ ϫⲉ ⲛ̀ⲛⲁⲧⲁϩⲛⲟ ⲛ̀ⲛⲁⲥ̀ⲫⲟⲧⲟⲩ: Ⲡⲟ︦ⲥ︦ ⲛ̀ⲑⲟⲕ ⲁⲕⲉ̀ⲙⲓ ⲉ̀ⲧⲁⲙⲉⲑⲙⲏⲓ: ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲙ̀ⲡⲓⲭⲱⲡ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉⲕⲙⲉⲑⲙⲏⲓ ϧⲉⲛ ⲡⲁϩⲏⲧ. ⲁ︦ⲗ︦.
بَشَّرْتُ بِعَدلِكَ في جَمَاعَةٍ عَظِيمَةٍ، هُوَذَا لَا أَمْنَعُ شَفَتيَّ. أَنْتَ يَا رَبُّ قَدْ عَلِمْتَ بِرِّيِ، لَمْ أَكْتُمْ عَدْلَكَ في قَلْبِي. هَلِّلُويَا.
People:
Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
الليلويا.
	Psalm Trailer for the Pope or a Bishop
(Ⲙⲁⲣⲟⲩϭⲁⲥϥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲧ̀ⲉⲕⲕ̀ⲗⲏⲥⲓⲁ̀...)
People:
Amen Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲙⲏⲛ Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
امين الليلويا.
Then the introduction to the Gospel is read.
ثم تقال مقدمة الأنجيل وهي:
Reader:
Blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord. Our Lord, God, Savior and King of us all, Jesus Christ, Son of the living God to whom is glory forever. Amen.
القارﺉُ:
مباركٌ الآتي باسمِ الربِّ إلهِ القواتِ، ربُّنا وإلهُنا ومخلصُنا وملكُنا كلِّنا، يسوعُ المسيحُ، ابنُ اللهِ الحيِّ، الذي لهُ المجدُ إلى الأبدِ. آمين.
Matins Gospel
الإنجيل
	Mark 2:13-17
(مرقس 2: 13-17)
13 Then He went out again by the sea; and all the multitude came to Him, and He taught them.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁϥⲓ̀ ⲟⲛ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ϩⲁ ⲫ̀ⲓⲟⲙ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲡⲓⲙⲏϣ ⲧⲏⲣϥ ⲉ̀ⲛⲁϥⲛⲏⲟⲩ ϩⲁⲣⲟϥ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛⲁϥϯⲥ̀ⲃⲱ ⲛⲱⲟⲩ ⲡⲉ.
13 ثُمَّ خَرَجَ أيْضًا إِلَى شَاطئ الْبَحْرِ. وَكَانَ كُلُّ الْجَمْعِ يَأْتُونَ إلَيْهِ فَكَانَ يُعَلِّمُهُمْ.
14 As He passed by, He saw Levi the son of Alphaeus sitting at the tax office. And He said to him, “Follow Me.” So he arose and followed Him.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉϥⲥⲓⲛⲓⲱ̀ⲟⲩ ⲁϥⲛⲁⲩ ⲉ̀Ⲗⲉⲩⲓ̀ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ Ⲁⲗⲫⲉⲟⲥ ⲉϥϩⲉⲙⲥⲓ ϩⲓ ⲡⲓⲧⲉⲗⲱⲛⲓⲟⲛ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ⲛⲁϥ ϫⲉ ⲙⲟϣⲓ ⲛ̀ⲥⲱⲓ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁϥⲧⲱⲛϥ ⲁϥⲙⲟϣⲓ ⲛ̀ⲥⲱϥ.
14 وَفِيمَا هُوَ مُجْتَازٌ رَأَى لَاوِيَ بْنَ حَلْفَى جَالِسًا عِنْدَ مَكَانِ الْجِبَايَةِ، فَقَالَ لَهُ: " اتْبَعْنِي ". فَقَامَ وَتَبِعَهُ.
15 Now it happened, as He was dining in Levi’s house, that many tax collectors and sinners also sat together with Jesus and His disciples; for there were many, and they followed Him.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁⲥϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲉϥⲣⲱⲧⲉⲃ ϧⲉⲛ ⲡⲉϥⲏⲓ ⲛⲉ ⲟⲩⲟⲛ ϩⲁⲛⲙⲏϣ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉⲗⲱⲛⲏⲥ ⲛⲉⲙ ϩⲁⲛⲣⲉϥⲉⲣⲛⲟⲃⲓ ⲛⲁⲩⲣⲱⲧⲉⲃ ⲛⲉⲙ Ⲓⲏ︦ⲥ︦ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲛⲉϥⲙⲁⲑⲏⲧⲏⲥ ⲛⲉ ⲟⲩⲟⲛ ⲟⲩⲙⲏϣ ⲙ̀ⲙⲁⲩ ⲡⲉ.
15 وَفِيمَا هُوَ مُتَّكِئٌ في بَيْتِهِ كَانَ كَثِيرُونَ مِنَ الْعَشَّارِينَ وَالْخُطَاةِ مُتَّكِئينَ مَعَ يَسُوعَ وَتَلَامِيذِهِ؛ لِأَنَّهُمْ كَانُوا كَثِيرِينَ وَتَبِعُوهُ.
16 And when the scribes and Pharisees saw Him eating with the tax collectors and sinners, they said to His disciples, “How is it that He eats and drinks with tax collectors and sinners?”
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛⲁⲩⲙⲟϣⲓ ⲛ̀ⲥⲱϥ ⲡⲉ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲛⲓⲥⲁϧ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲛⲓⲪⲁⲣⲓⲥⲉⲟⲥ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉ̀ⲧⲁⲩⲛⲁⲩ ϫⲉ ϥ̀ⲟⲩⲱⲙ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲛⲓⲧⲉⲗⲱⲛⲏⲥ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲛⲓⲣⲉϥⲉⲣⲛⲟⲃⲓ ⲛⲁⲩϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ⲛ̀ⲛⲉϥⲙⲁⲑⲏⲧⲏⲥ ϫⲉ ⲉⲑⲃⲉ ⲟⲩ ϥ̀ⲟⲩⲱⲙ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ϥ̀ⲥⲱ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲛⲓⲧⲉⲗⲱⲛⲏⲥ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲛⲓⲣⲉϥⲉⲣⲛⲟⲃⲓ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲡⲉⲧⲉⲛⲣⲉϥϯⲥ̀ⲃⲱ.
16 وَأمَّا الْكَتَبَةُ وَالفَرِّيسِيُّونَ فَلَمَّا رَأَوْهُ يَأْكُلُ مَعَ الْعَشَّارِينَ وَالْخُطَاةِ، كَانُوا يَقُولُونَ لِتَلَامِيذِهِ: " لِمَاذا مُعَلِّمُكُمْ يَأْكُلُ وَيَشْرَبُ مَعَ الْعَشَّارِينَ وَالْخُطَاةِ؟ ".
17 When Jesus heard it, He said to them, “Those who are well have no need of a physician, but those who are sick. I did not come to call the righteous, but sinners, to repentance.”
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉ̀ⲧⲁϥⲥⲱⲧⲉⲙ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ Ⲓⲏ︦ⲥ︦ ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ⲛⲱⲟⲩ ϫⲉ ⲥⲉⲉⲣⲭ̀ⲣⲓⲁ̀ ⲁⲛ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲛⲏⲉⲧϫⲟⲣ ⲙ̀ⲡⲓⲥⲏⲓⲛⲓ ⲁⲗⲗⲁ ⲛⲏⲉⲑⲙⲟⲕϩ ⲛⲉⲧⲁⲓⲓ̀ ⲅⲁⲣ ⲁⲛ ⲉ̀ⲑⲁϩⲉⲙ ⲛⲓⲑ̀ⲙⲏⲓ ⲁⲗⲗⲁ ⲛⲓⲣⲉϥⲉⲣⲛⲟⲃⲓ ⲉⲩⲙⲉⲧⲁⲛⲟⲓⲁ̀.
17 فَلَمَّا سَمِعَ يَسُوعُ قَالَ لَهُمْ: " لَا يَحْتَاجُ الأقْوِيَاءُ إِلَى الطَّبِيبِ بَلِ الْمَرْضَى. لأنِّي لَمْ آتِ لِأَدْعُوَ الأبْرَارَ بَلِ الْخُطَاةَ إِلَى التَّوْبَةِ ".