Stand in the fear of God and listen to the Holy Gospel. A reading from the Gospel according to our teacher Saint Matthew the Evangelist, and the pure disciple. May his blessings be with us all.
قِفُوا بِخَوْفِ اللهِ، وَأَنْصِتُوا لِسَمَاعِ الإِنْجِيلِ الْمُقَدَّسِ. فَصْلٌ مِنْ بِشَارَةِ الإِنْجِيلِ لِمُعَلِّمِنَا مَارْ متى الْبَشِيرِ، التِّلْمِيذِ الطَّاهِرِ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
From the Psalms of our teacher David the prophet. May his blessings be with us all.
مِنْ مَزَامِيرِ تَرَاتِيلِ مُعَلِّمِنَا دَاوُدَ النَّبِيِّ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
Vespers Psalm
المزمور
	Psalms 21:21,22
(مزامير 21: 21,22)
I will declare Your name to My brethren; In the midst of the assembly I will praise You. You who fear the Lord, praise Him! All you descendants of Jacob, glorify Him.
Ⲉⲓⲉ̀ⲥⲁϫⲓ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉⲕⲣⲁⲛ ϧⲁⲧⲟⲧⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ⲛⲁⲥ̀ⲛⲏⲟⲩ: ⲉⲓⲉ̀ϩⲱⲥ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟⲕ ϧⲉⲛ ⲑ̀ⲙⲏϯ ⲛ̀ϯⲉⲕⲕ̀ⲗⲏⲥⲓⲁ̀: ⲛⲏⲉⲧⲉⲣϩⲟϯ ϧⲁⲧϩⲏ ⲙ̀Ⲡⲟ︦ⲥ︦ ⲥ̀ⲙⲟⲩ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟϥ: ⲙⲁⲱ̀ⲟⲩ ⲛⲁϥ ⲡ̀ϫ̀ⲣⲟϫ ⲧⲏⲣϥ ⲛ̀Ⲓⲁⲕⲱⲃ. ⲁ︦ⲗ︦.
فَأُذِيعُ اسْمَكَ بَيْنَ إخْوَتِي. وفي وَسَطِ الْجَمَاعَةِ أُسَبِّحُكَ. يَا أيُّهَا الْخَائِفُونَ الرَّبَّ سَبِّحُوهُ، وَيَا مَعْشَرَ ذُرِّيَّةِ يَعْقُوبَ مَجِّدُوهُ. هَلِّلُويَا.
People:
Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
الليلويا.
	Psalm Trailer for the Pope or a Bishop
(Ⲙⲁⲣⲟⲩϭⲁⲥϥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲧ̀ⲉⲕⲕ̀ⲗⲏⲥⲓⲁ̀...)
People:
Amen Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲙⲏⲛ Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
امين الليلويا.
Then the introduction to the Gospel is read.
ثم تقال مقدمة الأنجيل وهي:
Reader:
Blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord. Our Lord, God, Savior and King of us all, Jesus Christ, Son of the living God to whom is glory forever. Amen.
القارﺉُ:
مباركٌ الآتي باسمِ الربِّ إلهِ القواتِ، ربُّنا وإلهُنا ومخلصُنا وملكُنا كلِّنا، يسوعُ المسيحُ، ابنُ اللهِ الحيِّ، الذي لهُ المجدُ إلى الأبدِ. آمين.
Vespers Gospel
الإنجيل
	Matthew 9:9-13
(متى 9: 9-13)
9 As Jesus passed on from there, He saw a man named Matthew sitting at the tax office. And He said to him, “Follow Me.” So he arose and followed Him.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉϥⲥⲓⲛⲓⲱ̀ⲟⲩ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ⲙ̀ⲙⲁⲩ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ Ⲓⲏ︦ⲥ︦ ⲁϥⲛⲁⲩ ⲉ̀ⲟⲩⲣⲱⲙⲓ ⲉϥϩⲉⲙⲥⲓ ϩⲓ ⲟⲩⲧⲉⲗⲱⲛⲓⲟⲛ ⲉ̀ⲡⲉϥⲣⲁⲛ ⲡⲉ Ⲙⲁⲧⲑⲉⲟⲥ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ⲛⲁϥ ϫⲉ ⲙⲟϣⲓ ⲛ̀ⲥⲱⲓ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁϥⲧⲱⲛϥ ⲁϥⲙⲟϣⲓ ⲛ̀ⲥⲱϥ.
9 وَفِيمَا يَسُوعُ مُجْتَازٌ مِنْ هُنَاكَ، رَأَى إِنْسَانًا جَالِسًا عِنْدَ مَكَانِ الْجِبَايَةِ، اسْمُهُ مَتَّى. فَقَالَ لَهُ: " اتْبَعْنِي ". فَقَامَ وَتَبِعَهُ.
10 Now it happened, as Jesus sat at the table in the house, that behold, many tax collectors and sinners came and sat down with Him and His disciples.
Ⲉϥⲣⲱⲧⲉⲃ ⲇⲉ ϧⲉⲛ ⲡ̀ⲏⲓ ⲛ̀Ⲥⲓⲙⲱⲛ ⲓⲥ ϩⲁⲛⲙⲏϣ ⲛ̀ⲣⲉϥⲉⲣⲛⲟⲃⲓ ⲛⲉⲙ ϩⲁⲛⲧⲉⲗⲱⲛⲏⲥ ⲁⲩⲓ̀ ⲁⲩⲣⲟⲑⲃⲟⲩ ⲛⲉⲙ Ⲓⲏ︦ⲥ︦ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲛⲉϥⲙⲁⲑⲏⲧⲏⲥ.
10 وَبَيْنَمَا هُوَ مُتَّكِئٌ في البَيْتِ، إذَا خُطَاةٌ وَعَشَّارُونَ كَثِيرُونَ قَدْ جَاءُوا وَاتَّكَأُوا مَعَ يَسُوعَ وَتَلَامِيذِهِ.
11 And when the Pharisees saw it, they said to His disciples, “Why does your Teacher eat with tax collectors and sinners?”
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉ̀ⲧⲁⲩⲛⲁⲩ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲛⲓⲪⲁⲣⲓⲥⲉⲟⲥ ⲛⲁⲩϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ⲛ̀ⲛⲉϥⲙⲁⲑⲏⲧⲏⲥ ϫⲉ ⲉⲑⲃⲉ ⲟⲩ ⲡⲉⲧⲉⲛⲣⲉϥϯⲥ̀ⲃⲱ ⲉϥⲟⲩⲱⲙ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲛⲓⲧⲉⲗⲱⲛⲏⲥ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲛⲓⲣⲉϥⲉⲣⲛⲟⲃⲓ.
11 فَلَمَّا رَأَى الفَرِّيسِيُّونَ ذلِكَ قَالُوا لِتَلَامِيذِهِ: " لِمَاذا يَأْكُلُ مُعَلِّمُكُمْ مَعَ العَشَّارِينَ وَالْخُطَاةِ؟ ".
12 When Jesus heard that, He said to them, “Those who are well have no need of a physician, but those who are sick.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉ̀ⲧⲁϥⲥⲱⲧⲉⲙ ⲇⲉ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ Ⲓⲏ︦ⲥ︦ ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ⲛⲱⲟⲩ ϫⲉ ⲛⲏⲉⲧϫⲟⲣ ⲥⲉⲉⲣⲭ̀ⲣⲓⲁ̀ ⲁⲛ ⲙ̀ⲡⲓⲥⲏⲓⲛⲓ ⲁⲗⲗⲁ ⲛⲏⲉⲑⲙⲟⲕϩ.
12 فَلَمَّا سَمِعَ يَسُوعُ قَالَ لَهُمْ: " لَا يَحْتَاجُ الأقْوِيَاءُ إِلَى الطَّبِيبِ بَلِ الْمَرْضَى.
13 But go and learn what this means: ‘I desire mercy and not sacrifice.’ For I did not come to call the righteous, but sinners, to repentance.”
Ⲙⲁϣⲉⲛⲱⲧⲉⲛ ⲇⲉ ⲁ̀ⲣⲓⲉ̀ⲙⲓ ϫⲉ ⲟⲩ ⲡⲉ ⲟⲩⲛⲁⲓ ⲡⲉϯⲟⲩⲁϣϥ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩϣⲟⲩϣⲱⲟⲩϣⲓ ⲁⲛ ⲛⲉⲧⲁⲓⲓ̀ ⲅⲁⲣ ⲁⲛ ⲉ̀ⲑⲁϩⲉⲙ ⲛⲓⲑ̀ⲙⲏⲓ ⲁⲗⲗⲁ ⲛⲓⲣⲉϥⲉⲣⲛⲟⲃⲓ ⲉⲩⲙⲉⲧⲁⲛⲟⲓⲁ̀.
13 فَاذْهَبُوا وَتَعَلَّمُوا مَا هُوَ: إنِّي أُرِيدُ رَحْمَةً لَا ذَبِيحَةً، لأنِّي لَمْ آتِ لأَدْعُوَ الأبْرَارَ بَلِ الْخُطَاةَ إِلَى التَّوْبَةِ ".