Stand in the fear of God and listen to the Holy Gospel. A reading from the Gospel according to our teacher Saint Mark the Evangelist, and the pure disciple. May his blessings be with us all.
قِفُوا بِخَوْفِ اللهِ، وَأَنْصِتُوا لِسَمَاعِ الإِنْجِيلِ الْمُقَدَّسِ. فَصْلٌ مِنْ بِشَارَةِ الإِنْجِيلِ لِمُعَلِّمِنَا مَارْ مرقس الْبَشِيرِ، التِّلْمِيذِ الطَّاهِرِ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
From the Psalms of our teacher David the prophet. May his blessings be with us all.
مِنْ مَزَامِيرِ تَرَاتِيلِ مُعَلِّمِنَا دَاوُدَ النَّبِيِّ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
Matins Psalm
المزمور
	Psalms 54:1
(مزامير 54: 1)
Hearken to my prayer, O God, And do not hide Yourself from my petition. Attend to me, and hear me.
Ϭⲓⲥ̀ⲙⲏ Ⲫϯ ⲉ̀ⲧⲁⲡ̀ⲣⲟⲥⲉⲩⲭⲏ: ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉⲣϩⲓⲡ̀ϩⲟ ⲙ̀ⲡⲁⲧⲱⲃϩ: ⲙⲁϩ̀ⲑⲏⲕ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟⲓ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲥⲱⲧⲉⲙ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟⲓ: ⲁ︦ⲗ︦.
أَنْصِتْ يَا أللَّهُ لِصَلَاتِي، وَلَا تَغْفَلْ عَنْ تَضَرُّعِي، اِلْتَفِتْ إِليَّ، وَاسْتَمِعْ مِنِّي.
People:
Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
الليلويا.
	Psalm Trailer for the Pope or a Bishop
(Ⲙⲁⲣⲟⲩϭⲁⲥϥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲧ̀ⲉⲕⲕ̀ⲗⲏⲥⲓⲁ̀...)
People:
Amen Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲙⲏⲛ Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
امين الليلويا.
Then the introduction to the Gospel is read.
ثم تقال مقدمة الأنجيل وهي:
Reader:
Blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord. Our Lord, God, Savior and King of us all, Jesus Christ, Son of the living God to whom is glory forever. Amen.
القارﺉُ:
مباركٌ الآتي باسمِ الربِّ إلهِ القواتِ، ربُّنا وإلهُنا ومخلصُنا وملكُنا كلِّنا، يسوعُ المسيحُ، ابنُ اللهِ الحيِّ، الذي لهُ المجدُ إلى الأبدِ. آمين.
Matins Gospel
الإنجيل
	Mark 10:1-12
(مرقس 10: 1-12)
1 Then He arose from there and came to the region of Judea by the other side of the Jordan. And multitudes gathered to Him again, and as He was accustomed, He taught them again.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉ̀ⲧⲁϥⲧⲱⲛϥ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ⲙ̀ⲙⲁⲩ ⲁϥⲓ̀ ⲉ̀ⲛⲓⲑⲟϣ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ϯⲒⲟⲩⲇⲉⲁ̀ ⲛⲉⲙ ϩⲓⲙⲏⲣ ⲙ̀ⲡⲓⲒⲟⲣⲇⲁⲛⲏⲥ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁⲩⲓ̀ ⲟⲛ ϩⲁⲣⲟϥ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ϩⲁⲛⲙⲏϣ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲙ̀ⲫ̀ⲣⲏϯ ⲉ̀ⲧⲉ ⲧⲉϥⲥⲩⲛⲏⲑⲓⲁ ⲧⲉ ⲛⲁϥϯⲥ̀ⲃⲱ ⲛⲱⲟⲩ ⲡⲉ.
1 وَقَامَ مِنْ هُنَاكَ وَجَاءَ إِلَى تُخُومِ الْيَهُودِيَّةِ إِلَى عَبْرِ الْأُرْدُنِّ، فَاِجْتَمَعَ إِلَيْهِ جُمُوعٌ أَيْضًا، وَكَانَ يُعَلِّمُهُمْ كَعَادَتِهِ.
2 The Pharisees came and asked Him, “Is it lawful for a man to divorce his wife?” testing Him.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁⲩⲓ̀ ϩⲁⲣⲟϥ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ϩⲁⲛⲪⲁⲣⲓⲥⲉⲟⲥ ⲛⲁⲩϣⲓⲛⲓ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟϥ ϫⲉ ⲁⲛ ⲥ̀ϣⲉ ⲛ̀ⲣⲱⲙⲓ ⲉ̀ϩⲓ ⲧⲉϥⲥ̀ϩⲓⲙⲓ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ⲉⲩⲉⲣⲡⲓⲣⲁⲍⲓⲛ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟϥ.
2 فَدَنَا الْفَرِّيسِيُّونَ وَسَأَلُوهُ لِيُجَرِّبُوهُ، هَلْ يَحِلُ لِلرَّجُلِ أَنْ يُطَلِّقَ امْرَأَتَهُ؟
3 And He answered and said to them, “What did Moses command you?”
Ⲛ̀ⲑⲟϥ ⲇⲉ ⲁϥⲉ̀ⲣⲟⲩⲱ̀ ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ⲛⲱⲟⲩ ϫⲉ ⲟⲩ ⲡⲉⲧⲁϥϩⲟⲛϩⲉⲛ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟϥ ϩⲓⲧⲉⲛ ⲑⲏⲛⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ Ⲙⲱⲩ̀ⲥⲏⲥ.
3 فَأَجَابَهُمْ قَائِلًا: بِمَاذَا أَوْصَاكُمْ مُوسَى؟
4 They said, “Moses permitted a man to write a certificate of divorce, and to dismiss her.”
Ⲛ̀ⲑⲱⲟⲩ ⲇⲉ ⲡⲉϫⲱⲟⲩ ⲛⲁϥ ϫⲉ ⲁϥⲟⲩⲁϩⲥⲁϩⲛⲓ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ Ⲙⲱⲩ̀ⲥⲏⲥ ⲉ̀ⲥ̀ϧⲉ ⲟⲩϫⲱⲙ ⲛ̀ⲥ̀ϧⲓ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩⲉⲓ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉ̀ⲭⲱ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ.
4 فَقَالُوا: إِنَّ مُوسَى قَدْ أَذِنَ أَنْ يُكْتَبَ كِتَابُ طَلَاقٍ، فَتُطَلَّقُ.
5 And Jesus answered and said to them, “Because of the hardness of your heart he wrote you this precept.
Ⲓⲏ︦ⲥ︦ ⲇⲉ ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ⲛⲱⲟⲩ ϫⲉ ⲉⲑⲃⲉ ⲧⲉⲧⲉⲛⲙⲉⲧⲛⲁϣⲧϩⲏ ⲧ ⲁϥⲥ̀ϧⲉ ⲧⲁⲓⲉⲛⲧⲟⲗⲏ ⲛⲱⲧⲉⲛ.
5 فَأَجَابَ يَسُوعُ وَقَالَ لَهُمْ: مِنْ أَجْلِ قَسَاوَةِ قُلُوبِكُمْ كَتَبَ لَكُمْ هَذِهِ الْوَصِيَّةَ.
6 But from the beginning of the creation, God ‘made them male and female.’
Ⲓⲥϫⲉⲛ ⲧ̀ⲁⲣⲭⲏⲇⲉ ⲙ̀ⲡⲓⲥⲱⲛⲧ ⲟⲩϩⲱⲟⲩⲧ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲥ̀ϩⲓⲙⲓ ⲡⲉⲧⲁϥⲥⲟⲛⲧⲟⲩ.
6 وَلَكِنْ مِنْ بَدْءِ الْخَلِيقَةِ، ذَكَرًا وَأُنْثَى خلقَهُمَا اللَّهُ.
7 ‘For this reason a man shall leave his father and mother and be joined to his wife,
Ⲉⲑⲃⲉ ⲫⲁⲓ ⲉ̀ⲣⲉ ⲡⲓⲣⲱⲙⲓ ⲭⲁ ⲡⲉϥⲓⲱⲧ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲧⲉϥⲙⲁⲩ ⲛ̀ⲥⲱϥ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉϥⲉ̀ⲧⲟⲙϥ ⲉ̀ⲧⲉϥⲥ̀ϩⲓⲙⲓ.
7 مِنْ أَجْلِ هَذَا يَتْرُكُ الرَّجُلُ أَبَاهُ وَأُمَّهُ وَيَلْتَصِقُ بِامْرَأَتِهِ،
8 and the two shall become one flesh’; so then they are no longer two, but one flesh.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉⲩⲉ̀ϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲙ̀ⲡⲃ︦ ⲉⲩⲥⲁⲣⲝ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩⲱⲧ ϩⲱⲥⲧⲉ ⲥⲉⲟⲓ ⲛ̀ ⲁⲛ ⲁⲗⲗⲁ ⲟⲩⲥⲁⲣⲝ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩⲱⲧ ⲧⲉ.
8 فَيَصِيرَانِ كِلَاهُمَا جَسَدًا وَاحِدًا، فَلَيْسَا هُمَا اثْنَيْنِ بَعْدُ وَلَكِنَّهُمَا جَسَدٌ وَاحِدٌ.
9 Therefore what God has joined together, let not man separate.”
Ⲫⲏ ⲟⲩⲛ ⲉ̀ⲧⲁ Ⲫϯ ⲧⲟⲙϥ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉⲛⲑ̀ⲣⲉ ⲫ̀ⲣⲱⲙⲓ ⲫⲟⲣϫϥ.
9 وَمَا جَمَعَهُ اللَّهُ لَا يُفَرِّقُهُ إِنْسَانٌ.
10 In the house His disciples also asked Him again about the same matter.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ϧⲉⲛ ⲡⲓⲏⲓ ⲟⲛ ⲁ̀ ⲛⲓⲙⲁⲑⲏⲧⲏⲥ ϣⲉⲛϥ ⲉⲑⲃⲉ ⲫⲁⲓ.
10 وَسَأَلَ تَلَامِيذَهُ أَيْضًا فِي الْبَيْتِ عَنْ ذَلِكَ.
11 So He said to them, “Whoever divorces his wife and marries another commits adultery against her.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ⲛⲱⲟⲩ ϫⲉ ⲫⲏⲉⲑⲛⲁⲭ ⲁ̀ ⲧⲉϥⲥ̀ϩⲓⲙⲓ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉϥϭⲓ ⲛ̀ⲕⲉⲟⲩⲓ̀ ϥ̀ⲟⲓ ⲛ̀ⲛⲱⲓⲕ ⲉ̀ϫⲱⲥ.
11 فَقَالَ لَهُمْ مَنْ طَلَّقَ امْرَأَتَهُ وَتَزَوَّجَ بِأُخْرَى فَقَدْ زَنَى عَلَيْهَا،
12 And if a woman divorces her husband and marries another, she commits adultery.”
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉ̀ϣⲱⲡ ϩⲱⲥ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉⲥⲭⲁ ⲡⲉⲥϩⲁⲓ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉⲥϭⲓ ⲛ̀ⲕⲉⲟⲩⲁⲓ ⲥ̀ⲟⲓ ⲛ̀ⲛⲱⲓⲕ.
12 وَإِنْ طَلَّقَتِ امْرَأَةٌ بَعْلَهَا وَتَزَوَّجَتْ بِآخَرَ فَقَدْ زَنَتْ.