Stand in the fear of God and listen to the Holy Gospel. A reading from the Gospel according to our teacher Saint Luke the Evangelist, and the pure disciple. May his blessings be with us all.
قِفُوا بِخَوْفِ اللهِ، وَأَنْصِتُوا لِسَمَاعِ الإِنْجِيلِ الْمُقَدَّسِ. فَصْلٌ مِنْ بِشَارَةِ الإِنْجِيلِ لِمُعَلِّمِنَا مَارْ لوقا الْبَشِيرِ، التِّلْمِيذِ الطَّاهِرِ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
From the Psalms of our teacher David the prophet. May his blessings be with us all.
مِنْ مَزَامِيرِ تَرَاتِيلِ مُعَلِّمِنَا دَاوُدَ النَّبِيِّ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
Vespers Psalm
المزمور
	Psalms 83:4,5
(مزامير 83: 4,5)
Even Your altars, O Lord of hosts, My King and my God. Blessed are those who dwell in Your house; They will still be praising You.
Ⲛⲉⲕⲙⲁⲛⲉⲣϣⲱⲟⲩϣⲓ Ⲡⲟ︦ⲥ︦ Ⲫϯ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲛⲓϫⲟⲙ: ⲡⲁⲞⲩⲣⲟ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲡⲁⲚⲟⲩϯ: ⲱ̀ⲟⲩⲛⲓⲁⲧⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩⲟⲛ ⲛⲓⲃⲉⲛ ⲉⲧϣⲟⲡ ϧⲉⲛ ⲡⲉⲕⲏⲓ: ⲉⲩⲉ̀ⲥ̀ⲙⲟⲩ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟⲕ ϣⲁⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲡⲓⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ. ⲁ︦ⲗ︦.
مَذابِحُكَ يَا رَبُّ إلَهَ القُوَّاتِ، مَلِكِي وَإلهِي. طُوبَى لِكُلِّ السُّكَّانِ في بَيْتِكَ، يُبَارِكُونَكَ إِلَى أبَدِ الأبَدِ. هَلِّلُويَا.
People:
Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
الليلويا.
	Psalm Trailer for the Pope or a Bishop
(Ⲙⲁⲣⲟⲩϭⲁⲥϥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲧ̀ⲉⲕⲕ̀ⲗⲏⲥⲓⲁ̀...)
People:
Amen Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲙⲏⲛ Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
امين الليلويا.
Then the introduction to the Gospel is read.
ثم تقال مقدمة الأنجيل وهي:
Reader:
Blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord. Our Lord, God, Savior and King of us all, Jesus Christ, Son of the living God to whom is glory forever. Amen.
القارﺉُ:
مباركٌ الآتي باسمِ الربِّ إلهِ القواتِ، ربُّنا وإلهُنا ومخلصُنا وملكُنا كلِّنا، يسوعُ المسيحُ، ابنُ اللهِ الحيِّ، الذي لهُ المجدُ إلى الأبدِ. آمين.
Vespers Gospel
الإنجيل
	Luke 7:1-10
(لوقا 7: 1-10)
1 Now when He concluded all His sayings in the hearing of the people, He entered Capernaum.
Ⲧⲁϥⲟⲩⲱ ⲇⲉ ⲉϥϫⲱⲕ ⲛ̀ⲛⲉϥⲥⲁϫⲓ ⲧⲏⲣⲟⲩ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ϧⲉⲛ ⲛⲉⲛⲙⲁϣϫ ⲙ̀ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ ⲁϥⲓ̀ ⲉ̀ϧⲟⲩⲛ ⲉ̀ⲕⲁⲫⲁⲣⲛⲁⲟⲩⲙ.
1 وَلَمَّا أَكْمَلَ أَقْوَالَهُ كُلَّهَا فِي مَسَامِعِ الشَّعْبِ دَخَلَ كَفْرَنَاحُومَ.
2 And a certain centurion’s servant, who was dear to him, was sick and ready to die.
Ⲟⲩⲉ̀ⲕⲁⲧⲟⲛⲧⲁⲣⲭⲟⲥ ⲇⲉ ϥⲙⲟⲕϩ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲡⲉϥⲃⲱⲕ ⲛⲁϥⲛⲁⲙⲟⲩ ⲡⲉ ⲫⲏⲉⲧⲁϥⲧⲁⲓⲏⲟⲩⲧ ⲛ̀ⲧⲟⲧϥ.
2 وَكَانَ عَبْدٌ لِقَائِدِ مِئَةٍ، مُتَألِّمًا مُشْرِفًا عَلَى الْمَوْتِ، وَكَانَ مُكَرَّمًا عِنْدَهُ.
3 So when he heard about Jesus, he sent elders of the Jews to Him, pleading with Him to come and heal his servant.
Ⲉⲧⲁϥⲥⲱⲧⲉⲙ ⲇⲉ ⲉⲑⲃⲉ Ⲓⲏ︦ⲥ︦ ⲁϥⲟⲩⲱⲣⲡ ϩⲁⲣⲟϥ ⲛϩⲁⲛⲡ̀ⲣⲉⲥⲃⲩⲧⲉⲣⲟⲥ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲛⲓⲓⲟⲩⲇⲁⲓ ⲉϥϯϩⲟ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟϥ ϩⲟⲡⲱⲥ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉϥⲓ̀ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉϥⲧⲟⲩϫⲉ ⲡⲉϥⲃⲱⲕ.
3 فَلَمَّا سَمِعَ عَنْ يَسُوعَ، أَرْسَلَ شُيُوخَ اليَهُودِ إِلَيْهِ يَسْأَلُهُ أَنْ يَأْتِيَ وَيَشْفِيَ عَبْدَهُ.
4 And when they came to Jesus, they begged Him earnestly, saying that the one for whom He should do this was deserving,
Ⲛ̀ⲑⲱⲟⲩ ⲇⲉ ⲉⲧⲁⲩⲓ̀ ϩⲁ Ⲓⲏ︦ⲥ︦ ⲁⲩϯϩⲟ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟϥ ⲥⲡⲟⲩⲇⲉⲱⲥ ⲉⲩϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ϫⲉ ϥ̀ⲉⲙⲡ̀ϣⲁ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲫⲏⲉⲧⲉⲕⲛⲁⲉⲣ ⲫⲁⲓ ⲛⲁϥ.
4 فَلَمَّا جَاءُوا إِلَى يَسُوعَ طَلَبُوا إِلَيْهِ بِاجْتِهَادٍ قَائِلِينَ: " إِنَّهُ مُسْتَحِقٌّ أَنْ تَفْعَلَ لَهُ هَذَا؛
5 “for he loves our nation, and has built us a synagogue.”
Ϥ̀ⲙⲉⲓ ⲅⲁⲣ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉⲛⲉⲑⲛⲟⲥ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ϯⲥⲩⲛⲁⲅⲱⲅⲏ ⲛ̀ⲑⲟϥ ⲁϥⲕⲟⲧⲥ ⲁⲛ.
5 لِأَنَّهُ مُحِبٌّ لِأُمَّتِنَا، وَقَدْ بَنَى لَنَا الْمَجْمَعَ ".
6 Then Jesus went with them. And when He was already not far from the house, the centurion sent friends to Him, saying to Him, “Lord, do not trouble Yourself, for I am not worthy that You should enter under my roof.
Ⲓⲏ︦ⲥ︦ ⲇⲉ ⲛⲁϥⲙⲟϣⲓ ⲛⲉⲙⲱⲟⲩ ⲡⲉ ϩⲏⲇⲏ ⲇⲉ ⲉϥⲟⲩⲏⲟⲩ ⲙ̀ⲡⲓⲏⲓ ⲁⲛ ⲁϥⲟⲩⲱⲣⲡ ϩⲁⲣⲟϥ ⲛ̀ϩⲁⲛϣ̀ⲫⲏⲣ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲡⲓⲉ̀ⲕⲁⲧⲟⲛⲧⲁⲣⲭⲟⲥ ⲉϥϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ⲛⲁϥ ϫⲉ Ⲡⲟ︦ⲥ︦ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉⲣϯ ϧⲓⲥⲓ ⲛⲁⲕ ϯⲙ̀ⲡ̀ϣⲁ ⲅⲁⲣ ⲁⲛ ϩⲓⲛⲁ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉⲕⲓ̀ ⲉ̀ϧⲟⲩⲛ ϧⲁ ⲑ̀ⲟⲩⲁϩⲥⲟⲓ ⲙ̀ⲡⲁⲏⲓ.
6 فَمَشَى يَسُوعُ مَعَهُمْ. وَإِذْ كَانَ غَيْرَ بَعِيدٍ عَنِ الْبَيْتِ، أَرْسَلَ إِلَيْهِ قَائِدُ الْمِئَةِ أَصْدِقَاءَ يَقُولُ لَهُ: " يَا رَبُّ، لَا تَتْعَبْ. فَإِنِّي لَسْتُ مُسْتَحِقًّا أَنْ تَدْخُلَ تَحْتَ سَقْفِ بَيْتِي.
7 Therefore I did not even think myself worthy to come to You. But say the word, and my servant will be healed.
Ⲉⲑⲃⲉⲫⲁⲓ ⲟⲩⲇⲉ ⲁ̀ⲛⲟⲕ ⲙ̀ⲡⲓⲁⲓⲧ ⲛⲉⲙⲡ̀ϣⲁ ⲛ̀ⲓ̀ ϣⲁⲣⲟⲕ ⲁⲗⲗⲁ ⲁ̀ϫⲟⲥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲡ̀ⲥⲁϫⲓ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ϥ̀ⲛⲁⲟⲩϫⲁⲓ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲡⲁⲁ̀ⲗⲟⲩ.
7 لِذَلِكَ لَمْ أَحْسِبْ ذَاتِي مُسْتَحِقًّا أَنْ آتِيَ إِلَيْكَ. لَكِنْ قُلْ كَلِمَةً فَيَبْرَأَ فَتَايَ.
8 For I also am a man placed under authority, having soldiers under me. And I say to one, ‘Go,’ and he goes; and to another, ‘Come,’ and he comes; and to my servant, ‘Do this,’ and he does it.”
Ⲕⲉ ⲅⲁⲣ ⲁ̀ⲛⲟⲕ ⲟⲩⲣⲱⲙⲓ ϩⲱ ⲉⲩⲉⲣⲧⲁⲥⲥⲓⲛ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟϥ ϧⲁ ⲩⲉⲣϣⲓϣⲓ ⲉ̀ⲟⲩⲟⲛ ϩⲁⲛⲙⲁⲧⲟⲓ ϧⲁⲣⲁⲧ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ϯϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ⲙ̀ⲫⲁⲓ ϫⲉ ⲙⲁϣⲉ ⲛⲁⲕ ϣⲁϥϣⲉ ⲛⲁϥ ⲕⲉⲟⲩⲁⲓ ⲇⲉ ⲁ̀ⲙⲟⲩ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ϣⲁϥⲓ̀ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲡⲁⲃⲱⲕ ⲉ ⲁⲣⲓ ⲫⲁⲓ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ϣⲁϥⲁⲓϥ.
8 فَإِنِّي أَنَا إِنْسَانٌ مُرَتَّبٌ تَحْتَ سُلْطَانٍ، وَإِنَّهُ تَحْتَ يَدِي جُنْدٌ. فَأَقُولُ لِهَذَا: اِذْهَبْ فَيَذْهَبُ، وَلِآخَرَ: تَعَالَ فَيَجِيءُ، وَلِعَبْدِي: اِفْعَلْ هَذَا فَيَفْعَلُ ".
9 When Jesus heard these things, He marveled at him, and turned around and said to the crowd that followed Him, “I say to you, I have not found such great faith, not even in Israel!”
Ⲉⲧⲁϥⲥⲱⲧⲉⲙ ⲇⲉ ⲉ̀ⲛⲁⲓ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ Ⲓⲏ︦ⲥ︦ ⲁϥⲉⲣϣ̀ⲫⲏ ⲣⲓ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟϥ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉⲧⲁϥⲫⲟⲛϩϥ ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ϫⲉ ϯϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ⲛⲱⲧⲉⲛ ⲉ ⲟⲩⲇⲉ ϧⲉⲛ ⲡⲓⲥ︦ⲗ︦ ⲧⲏⲣϥ ⲙ̀ⲡⲓϫⲉⲙ ⲟⲩⲛⲁϩϯ ⲛ̀ⲧⲁⲓⲙⲁⲓⲏ.
9 فَلَمَّا سَمِعَ يَسُوعُ هَذَا تَعَجَّبَ مِنْهُ، وَالتَفَتَ إِلَى الْجَمْعِ الَّذِي يَتْبَعُهُ وَقَالَ: " الْحَقَّ أَقُولُ لَكُمْ: إِنِّي لَمْ أَجِدْ فِي كُلِّ إِسْرَائِيلَ إِيمَانًا بِهَذَا الْمقْدَارِ ".
10 And those who were sent, returning to the house, found the servant well who had been sick.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉⲧⲁⲩⲕⲟⲧⲟⲩ ⲉ̀ⲡⲓⲏⲓ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲛⲏⲉⲧⲁⲩⲟⲩⲟⲣⲡⲟⲩ ⲁⲩϫⲓⲙⲓ ⲙ̀ⲡⲓⲃⲱⲕ ⲉⲁϥⲟⲩϫⲁⲓ.
10 فَرَجَعَ الْمُرْسَلُونَ إِلَى الْبَيْتِ، فَوَجَدُوا الْعَبْدَ الْمَرِيضَ قَدْ بَرِئَ.