Stand in the fear of God and listen to the Holy Gospel. A reading from the Gospel according to our teacher Saint Luke the Evangelist, and the pure disciple. May his blessings be with us all.
قِفُوا بِخَوْفِ اللهِ، وَأَنْصِتُوا لِسَمَاعِ الإِنْجِيلِ الْمُقَدَّسِ. فَصْلٌ مِنْ بِشَارَةِ الإِنْجِيلِ لِمُعَلِّمِنَا مَارْ لوقا الْبَشِيرِ، التِّلْمِيذِ الطَّاهِرِ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
From the Psalms of our teacher David the prophet. May his blessings be with us all.
مِنْ مَزَامِيرِ تَرَاتِيلِ مُعَلِّمِنَا دَاوُدَ النَّبِيِّ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
Matins Psalm
المزمور
	Psalms 9:9-10
(مزامير 9: 9-10)
Have mercy on me, O Lord! Consider my trouble from those who hate me, You who lift me up from the gates of death.
Ⲛⲁⲓⲛⲏⲓ Ⲡⲟ︦ⲥ︦ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ϫⲟⲩϣⲧ: ⲉ̀ⲡⲁⲑⲉⲃⲓⲟ̀ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ϧⲉⲛ ⲛⲁϫⲁϫⲓ. Ⲫⲏⲉ̀ⲧⲁϥϭⲁⲥⲧ: ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗϧⲉⲛ ⲛⲓⲡⲩⲗⲏ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲫ̀ⲙⲟⲩ: ⲁ︦ⲗ︦.
اِرْحَمْنِي يَا رَبُّ، وَانْظُرْ إِلَى ذُلِّي مِنْ أَعْدَائِي. يَا رَافِعِي، مِنْ أَبْوَابِ الْمَوْتِ.
People:
Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
الليلويا.
	Psalm Trailer for the Pope or a Bishop
(Ⲙⲁⲣⲟⲩϭⲁⲥϥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲧ̀ⲉⲕⲕ̀ⲗⲏⲥⲓⲁ̀...)
People:
Amen Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲙⲏⲛ Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
امين الليلويا.
Then the introduction to the Gospel is read.
ثم تقال مقدمة الأنجيل وهي:
Reader:
Blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord. Our Lord, God, Savior and King of us all, Jesus Christ, Son of the living God to whom is glory forever. Amen.
القارﺉُ:
مباركٌ الآتي باسمِ الربِّ إلهِ القواتِ، ربُّنا وإلهُنا ومخلصُنا وملكُنا كلِّنا، يسوعُ المسيحُ، ابنُ اللهِ الحيِّ، الذي لهُ المجدُ إلى الأبدِ. آمين.
Matins Gospel
الإنجيل
	Luke 20:9-19
(لوقا 20: 9-19)
9 Then He began to tell the people this parable: “A certain man planted a vineyard, leased it to vinedressers, and went into a far country for a long time.
Ⲁϥⲉⲣϩⲏⲧⲥ ⲇⲉ ⲛ̀ⲥⲁϫⲓ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ ⲛ̀ⲧⲁⲓⲡⲁⲣⲁⲃⲟⲗⲏ ⲛⲉ ⲩⲟⲛ ⲩⲣⲱⲙⲓ ⲉ̀ⲁϥϭⲟ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩⲓⲁϩⲁ̀ⲗⲟⲗⲓ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁϥⲧⲏⲓϥ ⲛ̀ϩⲁⲛⲟⲩⲓⲏ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁϥϣⲉ ⲛⲁϥ ⲉ̀ⲡ̀ϣⲉⲙⲙⲟ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩⲛⲓϣϯ ⲛ̀ⲥⲏⲟⲩ.
9 وَبَدَأَ يُكَلِّمُ الشَّعْبَ بِهَذَا الْمَثَلِ: " إِنْسَانٌ غَرَسَ كَرْمًا وَسَلَّمَهُ إِلَى كَرَّامِينَ وَسَافَرَ زَمَانًا طَوِيلًا.
10 Now at vintage-time he sent a servant to the vinedressers, that they might give him some of the fruit of the vineyard. But the vinedressers beat him and sent him away empty-handed.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ϧⲉⲛ ⲡ̀ⲥⲏⲟⲩ ϥⲟⲩⲱⲣⲡ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩⲃⲱⲕ ϩⲁ ⲛⲓⲟⲩⲓⲏ ϩⲓⲛⲁ ⲛ̀ⲥⲉϯ ⲛⲁϥ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ϧⲉⲛ ⲡ̀ⲟⲩⲧⲁϩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲡⲓⲓⲁϩⲁ̀ⲗⲟⲗⲓ ⲛⲓⲟⲩⲓⲏ ⲇⲉ ⲉⲧⲁⲩϩⲓⲟⲩⲓ̀ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟϥ ⲁⲩϯⲧⲟⲧϥ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ϥϣⲟⲩⲓⲧ.
10 وَفِي الْأَوَانِ أَرْسَلَ عَبْدًا إِلَى الْكَرَّامِينَ لِيُعْطُوهُ مِنْ ثَمَرِ الْكَرْمِ، فَضَرَبَهُ الْكَرَّامُونَ، وصَرَفُوهُ فَارِغًا.
11 Again he sent another servant; and they beat him also, treated him shamefully, and sent him away empty-handed.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁϥⲟⲩⲁϩⲧⲟⲧϥ ⲟⲛ ⲉ̀ⲟⲩⲱⲣⲡ ⲛⲱⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ⲕⲉⲃⲱⲕ ⲛ̀ⲑⲱⲟⲩ ⲇⲉ ⲉⲧⲁⲩϩⲓⲟⲩⲓ̀ ⲉ̀ⲡⲓ ⲭⲉⲧ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉⲧⲁⲩϣⲟϣϥ ⲁⲩϯⲧⲟⲧϥ ⲉⲃⲟⲗ ⲉϥϣⲟⲩⲓⲧ.
11 فَعَادَ أَيْضًا وَأَرْسَلَ إِلَيْهِمْ عَبْدًا آخَرَ، فَضَربُوا الْآخَرَ وَأَهَانُوهُ وَصَرَفُوهُ فَارِغًا.
12 And again he sent a third; and they wounded him also and cast him out.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁϥⲟⲩⲁϩⲧⲟⲧϥ ⲟⲛ ⲉ̀ⲟⲩⲱⲣⲡ ⲙ̀ⲡⲓⲙⲁϩⲅ︦ ⲛ̀ⲑⲱⲟⲩ ⲇⲉ ⲁⲩⲫⲱⲗϩ ⲙ̀ⲡⲁⲓⲭⲉⲧ ⲁⲩϩⲓⲧϥ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ.
12 ثُمَّ عَادَ أَيْضًا وَأَرْسَلَ ثَالِثًا، فَجَرَّحُوا هَذَا أَيْضًا وَأَخْرَجُوهُ.
13 “Then the owner of the vineyard said, ‘What shall I do? I will send my beloved son. Probably they will respect him when they see him.’
Ⲡⲉϫⲉ ⲟ︦ⲥ︦ ⲇⲉ ⲙ̀ⲡⲓⲓⲁϩⲁ̀ⲗⲟⲗⲓ ϫⲉ ⲟⲩ ⲡⲉϯⲛⲁⲁⲓϥ ϯⲛⲁⲟⲩⲱⲣⲡ ⲙ̀ⲡⲁϣⲏⲣⲓ ⲙ̀ⲙⲉⲛⲣⲓⲧ ⲁⲣⲏⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ⲥⲉϣⲓⲡⲓ ϧⲁⲧⲉϥϩⲏ.
13 فَقَالَ رَبُّ الْكَرْمِ: مَاذَا أَفْعَلُ؟ أُرْسِلُ ابْنِيَ الْحَبِيبَ، لَعَلَّهُمْ يَخْجَلُونَ مِنْهُ!
14 But when the vinedressers saw him, they reasoned among themselves, saying, ‘This is the heir. Come, let us kill him, that the inheritance may be ours.’
Ⲉⲧⲁⲩⲛⲁⲩ ⲇⲉ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟϥ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲓⲟⲩⲓⲏ ⲛⲁⲩⲥⲟϭⲛⲓ ⲡⲉ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲛⲟⲩⲉⲣⲏⲟⲩ ⲉⲩϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ϫⲉ ⲫⲁⲓ ⲡⲉ ⲡⲓⲕ̀ⲗⲏⲣⲟⲛⲟⲙⲟⲥ ⲁ̀ⲙⲱⲓⲛⲓ ⲙⲁⲣⲉⲛϧⲟⲑⲃⲉϥ ϩⲓⲛⲁ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉⲥϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲛⲁⲛ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ϯⲕ̀ⲗⲏⲣⲟⲛⲟⲙⲓⲁ.
14 فَلَمَّا رَآهُ الْكَرَّامُونَ تَآمَرُوا فِيمَا بَيْنَهُمْ قَائِلِينَ: هَذَا هُوَ الْوَارِثُ! تَعَالَوْا نَقْتُلُهُ لِيَكُونَ لَنَا الْمِيرَاثُ!
15 So they cast him out of the vineyard and killed him. Therefore what will the owner of the vineyard do to them?
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉⲧⲁⲩϩⲓⲧϥ ⲥⲁⲃⲟⲗ ⲙ̀ⲡⲓⲓⲁϩⲁ̀ⲗⲟⲗⲓ ⲁⲩϧⲟⲑⲃⲉϥ ⲟⲩ ⲡⲉⲧⲉϥⲛⲁⲁⲓϥ ⲛⲱⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ Ⲡⲟ︦ⲥ︦ ⲙ̀ⲡⲓⲓⲁϩⲁ̀ⲗⲟⲗⲓ.
15 فَأَخْرَجُوهُ خَارجَ الْكَرْمِ وَقَتَلُوهُ. فَمَاذَا يَفْعَلُ بِهِمْ رَبُّ الْكَرْمِ؟
16 He will come and destroy those vinedressers and give the vineyard to others.” And when they heard it they said, “Certainly not!”
Ϥ̀ⲛⲁⲓ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ϥ̀ⲛⲁⲧⲁⲕⲉ ⲛⲓⲟⲩⲓⲏ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ϥ̀ⲛⲁϯ ⲙ̀ⲡⲓⲓⲁϩⲁ̀ⲗⲟⲗⲓ ⲛ̀ϩⲁⲛⲕⲉⲭⲱⲟⲩⲛⲓ ⲉⲧⲁⲩⲥⲱⲧⲉⲙ ⲇⲉ ⲡⲉϫⲱⲟⲩ ϫⲉ ⲛ̀ⲛⲉⲥϣⲱⲡⲓ.
16 يَأْتِي وَيُهْلِكُ الْكَرَّامِينَ وَيُعْطِي الْكَرْمَ لِآخَرِينَ ". فَلَمَّا سَمِعُوا قَالُوا: " حَاشَا! "
17 Then He looked at them and said, “What then is this that is written: ‘The stone which the builders rejected Has become the chief cornerstone’?
Ⲛ̀ⲑⲟϥ ⲇⲉ ⲉⲧⲁϥⲥⲟⲙⲥ ⲉ̀ⲣⲱⲟⲩ ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ϫⲉ ⲟⲩ ⲡⲉ ⲫⲁⲓ ⲉⲧⲥ̀ϧⲏⲟⲩⲧ ϫⲉ ⲡⲓⲱⲛⲓ ⲉⲧⲁⲩϣⲟϣϥ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲛⲏⲉⲧⲕⲱⲧ ⲫⲁⲓ ⲁϥϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲉⲩϫⲱϫ ⲛ̀ⲗⲁⲕϩ.
17 فَنَظَرَ إِلَيْهِمْ وَقَالَ: " فَمَا هُوَ هَذَا الْمَكْتُوبُ: إِنَّ الْحَجَرَ الَّذِي رَفَضَهُ الْبَنَّاؤُونَ، هَذَا قَدْ صَارَ رَأْسَ الزَّاوِيَةِ؟
18 Whoever falls on that stone will be broken; but on whomever it falls, it will grind him to powder.”
Ⲟⲩⲟⲛ ⲛⲓⲃⲉⲛ ⲉⲑⲛⲁϩⲉⲓ ⲉ̀ϫⲉⲛ ⲡⲁⲓⲱⲛⲓ ⲉ̀ⲧⲉⲙ̀ⲙⲁⲩ ϥ̀ⲛⲁⲗⲱⲥ ⲫⲏ ⲇⲉ ⲉⲧⲉϥⲛⲁϩⲉⲓ ⲉ̀ϫⲱϥ ϥ̀ⲛⲁϣⲁϣϥ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ.
18 فَكُلُّ مَنْ يَسْقُطُ عَلَى هَذَا الْحَجَرِ يَتَرَضَّضُ، وَمَنْ يَسْقُطُ هُوَ عَلَيْهِ يَسْحَقُهُ! ".
19 And the chief priests and the scribes that very hour sought to lay hands on Him, but they feared the people —for they knew He had spoken this parable against them.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛⲁⲩⲕⲱϯ ⲡⲉ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲛⲓⲥⲁϧ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲛⲓⲁⲣⲭⲓⲉⲣⲉⲩⲥ ⲉ̀ⲉ̀ⲛ ⲛⲟⲩϫⲓϫ ⲉ̀ϩ̀ⲣⲏⲓ ⲉ̀ϫⲱϥ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ϧⲉⲛ ϯⲟⲩⲛⲟⲩ ⲉ̀ⲧⲉⲙ̀ⲙⲁⲩ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁⲩⲉⲣϩⲟϯ ϧⲁⲧ̀ϩⲏ ⲙ̀ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ ⲁⲩⲉ̀ⲙⲓ ⲅⲁⲣ ϫⲉ ⲉⲧⲁϥϫⲉ ⲧⲁⲓⲡⲁⲣⲁⲃⲟⲗⲏ ⲉⲑⲃⲏⲧⲟⲩ.
19 فَطَلَبَ الْكَتَبَةُ وَرُؤَسَاءُ الْكَهَنَةِ أَنْ يُلْقُوا أَيْدِيَهُمْ عَلَيْهِ فِي تِلْكَ السَّاعَةِ، فَخَافُوا الشَّعْبَ، لِأَنَّهُمْ عَلِمُوا أَنَّهُ قَالَ هَذَا الْمَثَلَ عَلَيْهِمْ.