Prophecies
النبوآت
	Jonah 1:1-2:1
(يونان 1: 1-2: 1)
A reading from Jonah, the prophet. May his holy blessings be with us. Amen.
من يونان النبي بركته المقدسة تكون معنا. آمين.
1 Now the word of the Lord came to Jonah the son of Amittai, saying,
1 وَصَارَتْ كَلِمَةُ الرَّبِّ إِلَى يُونَانَ بْنِ أَمِتَّايَ قَائِلًا:
2 “Arise, go to Nineveh, that great city, and cry out against it; for their wickedness has come up before Me.”
2 " قُمِ اِنْطَلِقْ إِلَى نِينَوَى الْمَدِينَةِ الْعَظِيمَةِ وَنَادِ عَلَيْهَا، لِأَنَّ صُرَاخَ شَرِّهَا قَدْ صَعِدَ إِلَيَّ ".
3 But Jonah arose to flee to Tarshish from the presence of the Lord. He went down to Joppa, and found a ship going to Tarshish; so he paid the fare, and went down into it, to go with them to Tarshish from the presence of the Lord.
3 فَقَامَ يُونَانُ لِيَهْرُبَ إِلَى تَرْشِيشَ مِنْ وَجْهِ الرَّبِّ، فَنَزَلَ إِلَى يَافَا فَوَجَدَ سَفِينَةً ذَاهِبَةً إِلَى تَرْشِيشَ، فَأَدَّى أُجْرَتَهَا وَنَزَلَ فِيهَا، لِيَذْهَبَ مَعَهُمْ إِلَى تَرْشِيشَ مِنْ وَجْهِ الرَّبِّ.
4 But the Lord sent out a great wind on the sea, and there was a mighty tempest on the sea, so that the ship was about to be broken up.
4 فَأَثَارَ الرَّبُّ رِيحًا شَدِيدَةً فِي الْبَحْرِ، فَأَحْدَثَتْ أَمْوَاجًا عَظِيمَةً فِي الْبَحْرِ وَأَشْرَفَتِ السَّفِينَةُ عَلَى الاِنْكِسَارِ.
5 Then the mariners were afraid; and every man cried out to his god, and threw the cargo that was in the ship into the sea, to lighten the load. But Jonah had gone down into the lowest parts of the ship, had lain down, and was fast asleep.
5 فَخَافَ الْمَلَّاحُونَ وَصَرَخُوا كُلُّ وَاحِدٍ إِلَى إلَهِهِ، وَطَرَحُوا الْأَمْتِعَةَ الَّتِي فِي السَّفِينَةِ إِلَى الْبَحْرِ لِيُخَفِّفُوا عَنْهُمْ. أَمَّا يُونَانُ فَنَزَلَ إِلَى جَوْفِ السَّفِينَةِ وَاِضْطَجَعَ وَاِسْتَغْرَقَ فِي النَّوْمِ.
6 So the captain came to him, and said to him, “What do you mean, sleeper? Arise, call on your God; perhaps your God will consider us, so that we may not perish.”
6 فَذَهَبَ إِلَيْهِ مُدَبِّرُ السَّفِينَةِ وَقَالَ لَهُ: " مَا بَالُكَ مُسْتَغْرِقًا فِي النَّوْمِ؟ قُمْ فَاِطْلُبْ إِلَى إلَهِكَ لَعَلَّ اللَّهَ يُخَلِّصُنَا فَلَا نَهْلِكَ ".
7 And they said to one another, “Come, let us cast lots, that we may know for whose cause this trouble has come upon us.” So they cast lots, and the lot fell on Jonah.
7 وَقَالَ كُلُّ وَاحِدٍ لِصَاحِبهِ: " هَلُمَّوا نُلْقِي قُرَعًا لِنَعْلَمَ بِسَبَبِ مَنْ أَصَابَنَا هَذَا الشَّرُّ ". فَأَلْقَوْا قُرَعًا، فَوَقَعَتِ الْقُرْعَةُ عَلَى يُونَانَ.
8 Then they said to him, “Please tell us! For whose cause is this trouble upon us? What is your occupation? And where do you come from? What is your country? And of what people are you?”
8 فَقَالُوا لَهُ: " أَخْبِرْنَا لِأَنَّهُ بِسَبَبِكَ نَزَلَ بِنَا هَذَا الشَّرُّ مَا عَمَلُكَ؟ وَمِنْ أَيْنَ جِئْتَ؟ وَمِنْ أَيِّ قَرْيَةٍ؟ وَمِنْ أَيِّ شَعْبٍ أَنْتَ؟ "
9 So he said to them, “I am a Hebrew; and I fear the Lord, the God of heaven, who made the sea and the dry land.”
9 فَقَالَ لَهُمْ: " أَنَا عَبْدُ الرَّبِّ، وَإِنِّي أَخَافُهُ وَأَتَّقِي الرَّبَّ إِلَهَ السَّمَاءِ الَّذِي صَنَعَ الْبَحْرَ وَالْيَبَسَ ".
10 Then the men were exceedingly afraid, and said to him, “Why have you done this?” For the men knew that he fled from the presence of the Lord, because he had told them.
10 فَخَافَ الرِّجَالُ خَوْفًا عَظِيْمًا، وَقَالُوا لَهُ: " لِمَاذَا فَعَلْتَ ذَلِكَ؟ " لِأَنَّ الرِّجَالَ قَدْ عَلِمُوا أَنَّهُ هَارِبٌ مِنْ وَجْهِ الرَّبِّ، لِأَنَّهُ أَخْبَرَهُمْ.
11 Then they said to him, “What shall we do to you that the sea may be calm for us?”—for the sea was growing more tempestuous.
11 فَقَالُوا لَهُ: " مَاذَا نَصْنَعُ بِكَ حَتَّى يَسْكُنَ الْبَحْرُ عَنَّا؟ " لِأَنَّ الْبَحْرَ كَانَ يَزْدَادُ هِيَاجًا.
12 And he said to them, “Pick me up and throw me into the sea; then the sea will become calm for you. For I know that this great tempest is because of me.”
12 فَقَالَ لَهُمْ يُونَانُ: " خُذُونِي وَأَلْقُونِي إِلَى الْبَحْرِ فَيَسْكُنَ الْبَحْرُ عَنْكُمْ، لِأَنَّنِي عَالِمٌ أَنَّ هَذَا الْمَوْجَ الْعَظِيمَ إِنَّمَا هَاجَ عَلَيْكُمْ بِسَبَبِي ".
13 Nevertheless the men rowed hard to return to land, but they could not, for the sea continued to grow more tempestuous against them.
13 وَكَانَ الرِّجَالُ يُجَذِّفُونَ لِيَرْجِعُوا إِلَى الْيَبَسِ فَلَمْ يَسْتَطِيعُوا، لِأَنَّ الرِّيحَ كَانَتْ شَدِيدَةً وَالْبَحْرُ اِزْدَادَ هِيَاجًا عَلَيْهُمْ.
14 Therefore they cried out to the Lord and said, “We pray, O Lord, please do not let us perish for this man’s life, and do not charge us with innocent blood; for You, O Lord, have done as it pleased You.”
14 فَصَرَخُوا إِلَى الرَّبِّ وَقَالُوا: " أَيُّهَا الرَّبُّ، لَا تُهْلِكْنَا بِسَبَبِ نَفْسِ هَذَا الرَّجُلِ، وَلَا تَجْعَلْ عَلَيْنَا دَمًا زَكِيًّا، فَإِنَّكَ أَنْتَ أَيُّهَا الرَّبُّ قَدْ صَنَعْتَ كَمَا شِئْتَ ".
15 So they picked up Jonah and threw him into the sea, and the sea ceased from its raging.
15 ثُمَّ حَمَلُوا يُونَانَ وَطَرَحُوهُ فِي الْبَحْرِ، فَوَقَفَ الْبَحْرُ عَنْ تَمَوُّجِهِ.
16 Then the men feared the Lord exceedingly, and offered a sacrifice to the Lord and took vows.
16 فَخَافَ الرِّجَالُ مِنَ الرَّبِّ خَوْفًا عَظِيمًا، وَذَبَحُوا ذَبِيحَةً لِلرَّبِّ وَأَعْلَنُوا الصَّلَاةَ.
1 Now the Lord had prepared a great fish to swallow Jonah. And Jonah was in the belly of the fish three days and three nights.
1 فَأَمَرَ الرَّبُّ حُوتًا عَظِيمًا لِابْتِلَاعِ يُونَانَ. فَكَانَ يُونَانُ فِي جَوْفِ الْحُوتِ ثَلَاثَةَ أَيَّامٍ وَثَلَاثَ لَيَالٍ.
Glory be to the Holy Trinity, our God, forever and unto the ages of all ages. Amen.
Ⲟⲩⲱ̀ⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ϯⲧ̀ⲣⲓⲁⲥ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ Ⲡⲉⲛⲛⲟⲩϯ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛⲉⲙ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲛⲓⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲧⲏⲣⲟⲩ: ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ.
مجداً للثالوث القدوس إلهنا الى أبد الآبدين كلها آمين.