Stand in the fear of God and listen to the Holy Gospel. A reading from the Gospel according to our teacher Saint Matthew the Evangelist, and the pure disciple. May his blessings be with us all.
قِفُوا بِخَوْفِ اللهِ، وَأَنْصِتُوا لِسَمَاعِ الإِنْجِيلِ الْمُقَدَّسِ. فَصْلٌ مِنْ بِشَارَةِ الإِنْجِيلِ لِمُعَلِّمِنَا مَارْ متى الْبَشِيرِ، التِّلْمِيذِ الطَّاهِرِ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
From the Psalms of our teacher David the prophet. May his blessings be with us all.
مِنْ مَزَامِيرِ تَرَاتِيلِ مُعَلِّمِنَا دَاوُدَ النَّبِيِّ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
Matins Psalm
المزمور
	Psalms 102:1, 7
(مزامير 102: 1, 7)
Bless the Lord, O my soul; And all that is within me, bless His holy name! The Lord is merciful and gracious, Slow to anger, and abounding in mercy.
Ⲧⲁⲯⲩⲭⲏ ⲥ̀ⲙⲟⲩ ⲉ̀Ⲡⲟ︦ⲥ︦: ⲛⲏⲉⲧⲥⲁϧⲟⲩⲛ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲓ ⲧⲏⲣⲟⲩ ⲥ̀ⲙⲟⲩ ⲉ̀ⲡⲉϥⲣⲁⲛ ⲉ︦ⲑ︦ⲩ︦: ⲟⲩⲣⲉϥϣⲉⲛϩⲏⲧ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛ̀ⲛⲁⲏⲧ ⲡⲉ Ⲡⲟ︦ⲥ︦: ⲟⲩⲣⲉϥⲱ̀ⲟⲩⲛ̀ϩⲏⲧ ⲡⲉ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛⲁϣⲉ ⲡⲉϥⲛⲁⲓ ⲁ︦ⲗ︦.
بَارِكِي يَا نَفْسِي الرَّبَّ، وَيَا جَمِيعَ مَا فِي دَاخِلِي بَارِكْ اِسْمَهُ الْقُدُّوسَ. الرَّبُّ رَؤُوفٌ رَحِيمٌ، طَوِيلُ الْأَنَاةِ وَكَثِيرُ الرَّحْمَةِ.
People:
Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
الليلويا.
	Psalm Trailer for the Pope or a Bishop
(Ⲙⲁⲣⲟⲩϭⲁⲥϥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲧ̀ⲉⲕⲕ̀ⲗⲏⲥⲓⲁ̀...)
People:
Amen Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲙⲏⲛ Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
امين الليلويا.
Then the introduction to the Gospel is read.
ثم تقال مقدمة الأنجيل وهي:
Reader:
Blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord. Our Lord, God, Savior and King of us all, Jesus Christ, Son of the living God to whom is glory forever. Amen.
القارﺉُ:
مباركٌ الآتي باسمِ الربِّ إلهِ القواتِ، ربُّنا وإلهُنا ومخلصُنا وملكُنا كلِّنا، يسوعُ المسيحُ، ابنُ اللهِ الحيِّ، الذي لهُ المجدُ إلى الأبدِ. آمين.
Matins Gospel
الإنجيل
	Matthew 7:6-12
(متى 7: 6-12)
6 “Do not give what is holy to the dogs; nor cast your pearls before swine, lest they trample them under their feet, and turn and tear you in pieces.
Ⲙ̀ⲡⲉⲣϯ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ ⲛ̀ⲛⲓⲟⲩϩⲱⲣ ⲟⲩⲇⲉ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉⲣϩⲓⲟⲩⲓ̀ ⲛ̀ⲛⲉⲧⲉⲛⲁ̀ⲛⲁⲙⲏⲓ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉⲙ̀ⲑⲟ ⲛ̀ⲛⲓⲉ̀ϣⲁⲩ ⲙⲏ ⲡⲟⲧⲉ ⲛ̀ⲥⲉϩⲱⲙⲓ ⲡ̀ⲉϫⲱⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ⲛⲟⲩϭⲁⲗⲁⲩϫ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛ̀ⲥⲉⲕⲟⲧⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ⲥⲉⲫⲉϧ ⲑⲏⲛⲟⲩ.
6 لاَ تُعْطُوا الْمُقَدَّسَ لِلْكِلاَبِ وَلاَ تَطْرَحُوا دُرَرَكُمْ قُدَّامَ الْخَنَازِيرِ لِئَلَّا تَدُوسَهَا بِأَرْجُلِهَا وَتَلْتَفِتَ فَتُمَزِّقَكُمْ.
7 “Ask, and it will be given to you; seek, and you will find; knock, and it will be opened to you.
Ⲁ̀ⲣⲓⲉ̀ⲧⲓⲛ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉⲩⲉ̀ϯ ⲛⲱⲧⲉⲛ ⲕⲱϯ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉ̀ⲣⲉⲧⲉⲛⲉ̀ϫⲓⲙⲓ ⲕⲱⲗϩ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉⲩⲉ̀ⲁⲟⲩⲱⲛ ⲛⲱⲧⲉⲛ.
7 «اسْأَلُوا تُعْطَوْا. اطْلُبُوا تَجِدُوا. اقْرَعُوا يُفْتَحْ لَكُمْ.
8 For everyone who asks receives, and he who seeks finds, and to him who knocks it will be opened.
Ⲟⲩⲟⲛ ⲅⲁⲣ ⲛⲓⲃⲉⲛ ⲉⲧⲉⲣⲉ̀ⲧⲓⲛ ϣⲁϥϭⲓ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲫⲏⲉⲧⲕⲱϯ ϣⲁϥϫⲓⲙⲓ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲫⲏⲉⲧⲕⲱⲗϩ ϣⲁⲩⲟⲩⲱⲛ ⲛⲁϥ.
8 لأَنَّ كُلَّ مَنْ يَسْأَلُ يَأْخُذُ وَمَنْ يَطْلُبُ يَجِدُ وَمَنْ يَقْرَعُ يُفْتَحُ لَهُ.
9 Or what man is there among you who, if his son asks for bread, will give him a stone?
Ⲓⲉ ⲛⲓⲙ ⲛ̀ⲣⲱⲙⲓ ⲉⲧϧⲉⲛ ⲑⲏⲛⲟⲩ ⲉ̀ⲧⲉ ⲡⲉϥϣⲏⲣⲓ ⲛⲁⲉⲣⲉ̀ⲧⲓⲛ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟϥ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩⲱⲓⲕ ⲙⲏ ϥ̀ⲛⲁϯ ⲛⲁϥ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩⲱ̀ⲛⲓ.
9 أَمْ أَيُّ إِنْسَانٍ مِنْكُمْ إِذَا سَأَلَهُ ابْنُهُ خُبْزاً يُعْطِيهِ حَجَراً؟
10 Or if he asks for a fish, will he give him a serpent?
Ⲓⲉ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉϥⲉⲣⲉ̀ⲧⲓⲛ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟϥ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩⲧⲉⲃⲧ ⲙⲏ ϥ̀ⲛⲁϯ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩϩⲟϥ ⲛⲁϥ.
10 وَإِنْ سَأَلَهُ سَمَكَةً يُعْطِيهِ حَيَّةً؟
11 If you then, being evil, know how to give good gifts to your children, how much more will your Father who is in heaven give good things to those who ask Him!
Ⲓⲥϫⲉ ⲟⲩⲛ ⲛ̀ⲑⲱⲧⲉⲛ ⲛ̀ⲑⲱⲧⲉⲛ ϩⲁⲛⲥⲁⲙⲡⲉⲧϩⲱⲟⲩ ⲧⲉⲧⲉⲛⲥⲱⲟⲩⲛ ⲉ̀ϯ ⲛ̀ⲛⲓⲧⲁⲓⲟ ⲉⲑⲛⲁⲛⲉⲩ ⲛ̀ⲛⲉⲧⲉⲛϣⲏⲣⲓ ⲓⲉ ⲁⲩⲏⲣ ⲙⲁⲗⲗⲟⲛ ⲡⲉⲧⲉⲛⲓⲱⲧ ⲉⲧϧⲉⲛ ⲛⲓⲫⲏⲟⲩⲓ̀ ⲉϥⲉ̀ϯ ⲛ̀ⲛⲓⲁ̀ⲅⲁⲑⲟ ⲛ̀ⲛⲏⲉⲑⲛⲁⲉⲣⲉ̀ⲧⲓⲛ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟϥ.
11 فَإِنْ كُنْتُمْ وَأَنْتُمْ أَشْرَارٌ تَعْرِفُونَ أَنْ تُعْطُوا أَوْلاَدَكُمْ عَطَايَا جَيِّدَةً فَكَمْ بِالْحَرِيِّ أَبُوكُمُ الَّذِي فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ يَهَبُ خَيْرَاتٍ لِلَّذِينَ يَسْأَلُونَهُ.
12 Therefore, whatever you want men to do to you, do also to them, for this is the Law and the Prophets.
Ϩⲱⲃ ⲇⲉ ⲛⲓⲃⲉⲛ ⲉ̀ⲧⲉⲧⲉⲛⲛⲁⲟⲩⲱϣ ϩⲓⲛⲁ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲛⲓⲣⲱⲙⲓ ⲁⲓⲧⲟⲩ ⲛⲱⲧⲉⲛ ⲁ̀ⲣⲓⲟⲩⲓ̀ ⲛⲱⲟⲩ ϩⲱⲧⲉⲛ ⲙ̀ⲡⲁⲓⲣⲏϯ ⲫⲁⲓ ⲅⲁⲣ ⲡⲉ ⲡⲓⲛⲟⲙⲟⲥ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲛⲓⲡⲣⲟⲫⲏⲧⲏⲥ.
12 فَكُلُّ مَا تُرِيدُونَ أَنْ يَفْعَلَ النَّاسُ بِكُمُ افْعَلُوا هَكَذَا أَنْتُمْ أَيْضاً بِهِمْ لأَنَّ هَذَا هُوَ النَّامُوسُ وَالأَنْبِيَاءُ.