Stand in the fear of God and listen to the Holy Gospel. A reading from the Gospel according to our teacher Saint Mark the Evangelist, and the pure disciple. May his blessings be with us all.
قِفُوا بِخَوْفِ اللهِ، وَأَنْصِتُوا لِسَمَاعِ الإِنْجِيلِ الْمُقَدَّسِ. فَصْلٌ مِنْ بِشَارَةِ الإِنْجِيلِ لِمُعَلِّمِنَا مَارْ مرقس الْبَشِيرِ، التِّلْمِيذِ الطَّاهِرِ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
From the Psalms of our teacher David the prophet. May his blessings be with us all.
مِنْ مَزَامِيرِ تَرَاتِيلِ مُعَلِّمِنَا دَاوُدَ النَّبِيِّ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
Vespers Psalm
المزمور
	Psalms 39:8,3
(مزامير 39: 8,3)
I have proclaimed the good news of righteousness In the great assembly; Indeed, I do not restrain my lips. And set my feet upon a rock, And established my steps.
Ⲁⲓϩⲓϣⲉⲛⲛⲟⲩϥⲓ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉⲕⲙⲉⲑⲙⲏⲓ ϧⲉⲛ ⲟⲩⲛⲓϣϯ ⲛ̀ⲉⲕⲕ̀ⲗⲏⲥⲓⲁ̀: ϩⲏⲡⲡⲉ ϫⲉ ⲛ̀ⲛⲁⲧⲁϩⲛⲟ ⲛ̀ⲛⲁⲥ̀ⲫⲟⲧⲟⲩ: ⲁϥⲧⲁϩⲟ ⲛ̀ⲛⲁϭⲁⲗⲁⲩϫ ⲉ̀ⲣⲁⲧⲟⲩ ⲉ̀ϫⲉⲛ ⲟⲩⲡⲉⲧⲣⲁ: ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁϥⲥⲟⲩⲧⲱⲛ ⲛⲁⲧⲁⲧⲥⲓ . ⲁ︦ⲗ︦.
بَشَّرْتُ بِعَدلِكَ في جَمَاعَةٍ عَظِيمَةٍ، هُوَذَا لَا أَمْنَعُ شَفَتَيَّ. أَقَامَ عَلَى الصَّخْرَةِ رِجْلَيَّ. وَسَهَّلَ خُطُوَاتِي. هَلِّلُويَا.
People:
Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
الليلويا.
	Psalm Trailer for the Pope or a Bishop
(Ⲙⲁⲣⲟⲩϭⲁⲥϥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲧ̀ⲉⲕⲕ̀ⲗⲏⲥⲓⲁ̀...)
People:
Amen Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲙⲏⲛ Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
امين الليلويا.
Then the introduction to the Gospel is read.
ثم تقال مقدمة الأنجيل وهي:
Reader:
Blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord. Our Lord, God, Savior and King of us all, Jesus Christ, Son of the living God to whom is glory forever. Amen.
القارﺉُ:
مباركٌ الآتي باسمِ الربِّ إلهِ القواتِ، ربُّنا وإلهُنا ومخلصُنا وملكُنا كلِّنا، يسوعُ المسيحُ، ابنُ اللهِ الحيِّ، الذي لهُ المجدُ إلى الأبدِ. آمين.
Vespers Gospel
الإنجيل
	Mark 6:6-13
(مرقس 6: 6-13)
6 Then He went about the villages in a circuit, teaching.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛⲁϥⲙⲟⲩϣⲧ ⲛ̀ⲛⲓϯⲙⲓ ⲉ̀ⲧⲉ ⲙ̀ⲡ̀ⲕⲱϯ ⲉϥϯⲥ̀ⲃⲱ.
6 وَكَانَ يَطُوفُ الْقُرَى الْمُحِيطَةَ يُعَلِّمُ.
7 And He called the twelve to Himself, and began to send them out two by two, and gave them power over unclean spirits.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁϥⲙⲟⲩϯ ⲉ̀ⲡⲓⲓ︦ⲃ︦ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁϥⲉⲣϩⲏⲧⲥ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩⲟⲣⲡⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ⲃ︦ ⲃ︦ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁϥϯⲉⲣϣⲓϣⲓ ⲛⲱⲟⲩ ⲉ̀ϫⲉⲛ ⲛⲓⲡⲛ︦ⲁ︦ ⲛ̀ⲁ̀ⲕⲁⲑⲁⲣⲧⲟⲛ.
7 وَدَعَا الاثْنَيْ عَشَرَ وَابْتَدَأَ يُرْسِلُهُمُ اثْنَيْنِ اثْنَيْنِ، وَأَعْطَاهُمْ سُلْطَانًا عَلَى الأَرْوَاحِ النَّجِسَةِ، وَأَوْصَاهُمْ أَنْ لَا يَحْمِلُوا شَيْئًا
8 He commanded them to take nothing for the journey except a staff—no bag, no bread, no copper in their money belts—
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁϥϩⲟⲛϩⲉⲛ ⲛⲱⲟⲩ ⲉ̀ϣ̀ⲧⲉⲙⲉⲗ ϩ̀ⲗⲓ ⲛⲉⲙⲱⲟⲩ ϩⲓ ⲫ̀ⲙⲱⲓⲧ ⲉ̀ⲃⲏⲗ ⲉ̀ⲟⲩϣ̀ⲃⲱⲧ ⲙ̀ⲙⲁⲩⲁⲧϥ ⲟⲩⲇⲉ ⲱⲓⲕ ⲟⲩⲇⲉ ⲡⲏⲣⲁ ⲟⲩⲇⲉ ϩⲟⲙⲧ ϧⲉⲛ ⲛⲉⲧⲉⲛⲙⲟϫϧ.
8 مَعَهُمْ في الطَّرِيقِ غَيْرَ عَصًا فَقَطْ، وَلَا خُبْزًا وَلَا مِزْوَدًا وَلَا نُحَاسًا في مَنَاطِقِهِمْ.
9 but to wear sandals, and not to put on two tunics.
Ⲁⲗⲗⲁ ⲉ̀ⲣⲉ ϩⲁⲛⲥⲁⲛⲇⲁⲗⲓⲟⲛ ⲧⲟⲓ ⲉ̀ⲣⲁⲧⲉⲛ ⲑⲏⲛⲟⲩ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉⲣϯ ϣ̀ⲑⲏⲛ ⲃ︦ϯ ϩⲓ ⲑⲏⲛⲟⲩ.
9 بَلْ يَكُونُوا مَشْدُودِينَ بِنِعَالٍ، وَلَا يَلْبَسُوا ثَوْبَيْنِ.
10 Also He said to them, “In whatever place you enter a house, stay there till you depart from that place.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛⲁϥϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ⲛⲱⲟⲩ ϫⲉ ⲡⲓⲙⲁ ⲉ̀ⲧⲉⲧⲉⲛⲛⲁϣⲉ ⲉ̀ϧⲟⲩⲛ ⲉ̀ⲟⲩⲏⲓ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟϥ ϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲙ̀ⲙⲁⲩ ϣⲁⲧⲉⲧⲉⲛⲓ̀ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ⲙ̀ⲙⲁⲩ.
10 وَقَالَ لَهُمْ: " حَيْثُمَا دَخَلْتُمْ بَيْتًا فَأَقِيمُوا فِيهِ حَتَّى تَخْرُجُوا مِنْ هُنَاكَ. وَكُلُّ مَوْضِعٍ لَا يَقْبَلُكُمْ وَلَا يَسْمَعُ لَكُمْ،
11 And whoever will not receive you nor hear you, when you depart from there, shake off the dust under your feet as a testimony against them. Assuredly, I say to you, it will be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of judgment than for that city!”
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲙⲁ ⲛⲓⲃⲉⲛ ⲉ̀ⲧⲉⲛ̀ϥ̀ⲛⲁϣⲉⲡ ⲑⲏⲛⲟⲩ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟϥ ⲁⲛ ⲟⲩⲇⲉ ⲛ̀ⲧⲟⲩϣ̀ⲧⲉⲙⲥⲱⲧⲉⲙ ⲉ̀ⲣⲱⲧⲉⲛ ⲉ̀ⲣⲉⲧⲉⲛⲛⲏⲟⲩ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ⲙ̀ⲙⲁⲩ ⲛⲉϩ ⲡ̀ϣⲱⲓϣ ⲉⲧⲥⲁⲉ̀ϧ̀ⲣⲏⲓ ⲛ̀ⲛⲉⲧⲉⲛϭⲁⲗⲁⲩϫ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ⲉⲩⲙⲉⲧⲙⲉⲑⲣⲉ ⲛⲱⲟⲩ ϯϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ⲛⲱⲧⲉⲛ ⲧⲁⲫ̀ⲙⲏⲓ ϫⲉ ⲟⲩⲟⲛ ⲟⲩⲙ̀ⲧⲟⲛ ⲛⲁϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲛ̀Ⲥⲟⲇⲟⲙⲁ ⲛⲉⲙ Ⲅⲟⲙⲟⲣⲣⲁ ϧⲉⲛ ⲡⲓⲉ̀ϩⲟⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ϯⲕ̀ⲣⲓⲥⲓⲥ ⲉ̀ϩⲟⲧⲉ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ϯⲃⲁⲕⲓ ⲉ̀ⲧⲉ ⲙ̀ⲙⲁⲩ.
11 فَبينَمَا أَنْتُمْ خَارِجُونَ مِنْهُ انْفُضُوا الْغُبَارَ الَّذِي تَحْتَ أرْجُلِكُمْ شَهَادَةً عَلَيْهِمْ. الْحَقَّ أَقُولُ لَكُمْ: سَتَكُونُ لِسَدُومَ وَعَمُورَةَ يَوْمَ الدِّينِ رَاحَةٌ أَكْثَرُ مِمَّا لِتِلْكَ الْمَدِينَةِ ".
12 So they went out and preached that people should repent.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉ̀ⲧⲁⲩⲓ̀ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ⲁⲩϩⲓⲱⲓϣ ϩⲓⲛⲁ ⲛ̀ⲥⲉⲉⲣⲙⲉⲧⲁⲛⲟⲓⲛ.
12 فَخَرَجُوا وَصَارُوا يَكْرِزُونَ أَنْ يَتُوبُوا.
13 And they cast out many demons, and anointed with oil many who were sick, and healed them.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁⲩϩⲓ ⲟⲩⲙⲏϣ ⲛ̀ⲇⲉⲙⲱⲛ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲟⲩⲙⲏϣ ⲛ̀ⲣⲉϥϣⲱⲛⲓ ⲛⲁⲩⲑⲱϩⲥ ⲙ̀ⲙⲱⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛⲁⲩⲉⲣⲫⲁϧⲣⲓ ⲉ̀ⲣⲱⲟⲩ.
13 وَأَخْرَجُوا شَيَاطِينَ كَثِيرَةً، وَدَهَنُوا بِزَيْتٍ مَرْضَى كَثِيرِينَ فَشَفَوْهُمْ.