Stand in the fear of God and listen to the Holy Gospel. A reading from the Gospel according to our teacher Saint Luke the Evangelist, and the pure disciple. May his blessings be with us all.
قِفُوا بِخَوْفِ اللهِ، وَأَنْصِتُوا لِسَمَاعِ الإِنْجِيلِ الْمُقَدَّسِ. فَصْلٌ مِنْ بِشَارَةِ الإِنْجِيلِ لِمُعَلِّمِنَا مَارْ لوقا الْبَشِيرِ، التِّلْمِيذِ الطَّاهِرِ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
From the Psalms of our teacher David the prophet. May his blessings be with us all.
مِنْ مَزَامِيرِ تَرَاتِيلِ مُعَلِّمِنَا دَاوُدَ النَّبِيِّ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
Matins Psalm
المزمور
	Psalms 27:7-8
(مزامير 27: 7-8)
Blessed be the Lord, for He has heard the voice of my petition! The Lord is my strength and my shield; My heart trusted in Him.
Ϥ̀ⲥ̀ⲙⲁⲣⲱⲟⲩⲧ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ Ⲡⲟ︦ⲥ︦ ⲡⲁⲛⲟⲩϯ: ϫⲉ ⲁϥⲥⲱⲧⲉⲙ ⲉ̀ⲡ̀ϧ̀ⲣⲱⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲡⲁⲧⲱⲃϩ: Ⲡⲟ︦ⲥ︦ ⲡⲉ ⲡⲁⲃⲟⲏ̀ⲑⲟⲥ: ⲛⲉⲙ ⲡⲁⲣⲉϥϯ ⲉ̀ϩ̀ⲣⲏⲓ ⲉ̀ϫⲱⲓ: ⲁ︦ⲗ︦.
مُبَارَكٌ الرَّبُّ الْإِلَهُ؛ لِأَنَّهُ سَمِعَ صَوْتَ دُعَائِي. الرَّبُّ هُوَ عَوْنِي وَنَاصِرِي، عَلَيْهِ أَتَّكِلُ.
People:
Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
الليلويا.
	Psalm Trailer for the Pope or a Bishop
(Ⲙⲁⲣⲟⲩϭⲁⲥϥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲧ̀ⲉⲕⲕ̀ⲗⲏⲥⲓⲁ̀...)
People:
Amen Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲙⲏⲛ Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
امين الليلويا.
Then the introduction to the Gospel is read.
ثم تقال مقدمة الأنجيل وهي:
Reader:
Blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord. Our Lord, God, Savior and King of us all, Jesus Christ, Son of the living God to whom is glory forever. Amen.
القارﺉُ:
مباركٌ الآتي باسمِ الربِّ إلهِ القواتِ، ربُّنا وإلهُنا ومخلصُنا وملكُنا كلِّنا، يسوعُ المسيحُ، ابنُ اللهِ الحيِّ، الذي لهُ المجدُ إلى الأبدِ. آمين.
Matins Gospel
الإنجيل
	Luke 4:31-37
(لوقا 4: 31-37)
31 Then He went down to Capernaum, a city of Galilee, and was teaching them on the Sabbaths.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁϥⲓ̀ ⲉ̀ϧ̀ⲣⲏⲓ ⲉ̀ⲕⲁⲫⲁⲣⲛⲁⲟⲩⲙ ⲟⲩⲃⲁⲕⲓ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ϯⲅⲁⲗⲓⲗⲉⲁ̀ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛⲁϥϯⲥ̀ⲃⲱ ⲛⲱⲟⲩ ϧⲉⲛ ⲛⲓⲥⲁⲃⲃⲁⲧⲟⲛ.
31 وَنَزَلَ إلى كَفْرَنَاحُومَ، مَدِينَةٍ مِنَ الْجَلِيلِ، وَكَانَ يُعَلِّمُهُمْ في السُّبُوتِ.
32 And they were astonished at His teaching, for His word was with authority.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛⲁⲩⲧⲱⲙⲧ ⲉ̀ϫⲉⲛ ⲧⲉϥⲥ̀ⲃⲱ ϫⲉ ⲛⲁⲣⲉ ⲡⲉϥⲥⲁϫⲓ ⲭⲏ ϧⲉⲛ ⲟⲩⲉⲣϣⲓϣⲓ.
32 فَبُهِتُوا مِنْ تَعْلِيمِهِ؛ لِأَنَّ كَلَامَهُ كَانَ بِسُلْطَانٍ.
33 Now in the synagogue there was a man who had a spirit of an unclean demon. And he cried out with a loud voice,
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛⲉ ⲟⲩⲟⲛ ⲟⲩⲣⲱⲙⲓ ϧⲉⲛ ϯ ⲥⲩⲛⲁⲅⲱⲅⲏ ⲉⲟⲩⲟⲛ ⲟⲩⲡⲛ︦ⲁ︦ ⲛ̀ⲁⲕⲁⲑⲁⲣⲧⲟⲛ ⲛⲉⲙⲁϥ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁϥⲱϣ ⲉ̀ⲡ̀ϣⲱⲓ ϧⲉⲛ ⲟⲩⲛⲓϣϯ ⲛ̀ϧ̀ⲣⲱⲟⲩ.
33 وَكَانَ يُوجَدُ في الْمَجْمَعِ رَجُلٌ بِهِ رُوحُ شَيْطَانٍ نَجِسٍ، فَصَاحَ بِصَوْتٍ عَظِيمٍ
34 saying, “Let us alone! What have we to do with You, Jesus of Nazareth? Did You come to destroy us? I know who You are—the Holy One of God!”
Ϫⲉ ⲁ̀ϧⲟⲕ ⲛⲉⲙⲁⲛ ϩⲱⲕ Ⲓⲏ︦ⲥ︦ ⲡⲓⲣⲉⲙⲛⲁⲍⲁⲣⲉⲑ ⲉⲧⲁⲕⲓ̀ ⲉ̀ⲧⲁⲕⲟⲛ ϯⲥⲱⲟⲩⲛ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲕ ϫⲉ ⲛ̀ⲑⲟⲕ ⲛⲓⲙ ⲡⲓⲁⲅⲓⲟⲥ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲫϯ.
34 قَائِلًا: " مَا لَنَا وَلَكَ يَا يَسُوعُ النَّاصِرِيُّ؟ أَتَيْتَ لِتُهْلِكَنَا! أَنَا أَعْرِفُكَ مَنْ أَنْتَ: قُدُّوسُ اللَّهِ! ".
35 But Jesus rebuked him, saying, “Be quiet, and come out of him!” And when the demon had thrown him in their midst, it came out of him and did not hurt him.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁϥⲉⲣⲉ̀ⲡⲓⲧⲓⲙⲁⲛ ⲛⲁϥ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ Ⲓⲏ︦ⲥ︦ ⲉϥϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ϫⲉ ⲑⲱⲙ ⲛⲣⲱⲕ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁ̀ⲙⲟⲩ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ⲛ̀ϧⲏⲧϥ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉⲧⲁ ⲡⲓⲇⲉⲙⲱⲛ ⲥⲁⲧϥ ⲉ̀ⲑ̀ⲙⲏϯ ⲁϥⲓ̀ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ⲛ̀ϧⲏⲧϥ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉϥϯ ϩ̀ⲗⲓ ⲛ̀ⲉⲙⲕⲁϩ ⲛⲁϥ.
35 فَانْتَهَرَهُ يَسُوعُ قَائِلًا: " اِخْرَسْ! وَاخْرُجْ مِنْهُ! ". فَصَرَعَهُ الشَّيْطَانُ فِي الْوَسَطِ وَخَرَجَ مِنْهُ وَلَمْ يُؤْلِمْهُ شَيْءٌ.
36 Then they were all amazed and spoke among themselves, saying, “What a word this is! For with authority and power He commands the unclean spirits, and they come out.”
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁ ⲩⲛⲓϣϯ ⲛ̀ϩⲟϯ ϣⲱⲡⲓ ϩⲓϫⲱⲟⲩ ⲧⲏⲣⲟⲩ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛⲁⲩⲥⲁϫⲓ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲛⲟⲩⲉⲣⲏ ⲟⲩ ⲉⲩϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ϫⲉ ⲟⲩ ⲡⲉ ⲡⲁⲓⲥⲁϫⲓ ϫⲉ ϧⲉⲛ ⲟⲩⲉⲣϣⲓϣⲓ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲟⲩϫⲟⲙ ϥⲟⲩⲁϩⲥⲁϩⲛⲓ ⲛ̀ⲛⲓⲡ̀ⲛ︦ⲁ︦ ⲛ̀ⲁⲕⲁⲑⲁⲣⲧⲟⲛ ⲥⲉⲛⲏⲟⲩ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ.
36 فَحَدَثَ خَوْفٌ عَظِيمٌ عَلَى جَمِيعِهِمْ، وَكَانُوا يُكَلِّمُونَ بَعْضُهُمْ بَعْضًا قَائِلِينَ: " مَا هَذِهِ الْكَلِمَةُ؟ لِأَنَّهُ بِسُلْطَانٍ وَقُوَّةٍ يَأْمُرُ الْأَرْوَاحَ النَّجِسَةَ فَتَخْرُجُ! ".
37 And the report about Him went out into every place in the surrounding region.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛⲉ ⲟⲩⲟⲛ ⲟⲩⲥ̀ⲙⲏ ⲥⲏⲣ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ⲉⲑⲃⲏⲧϥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲙⲁⲓ ⲛⲓⲃⲉⲛ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲡⲉⲣⲓⲭⲱⲣⲟⲥ.
37 فَذَاعَ صِيتٌ عَنْهُ في كُلِّ مَوْضِعٍ في الْكُورَةِ الْمُحِيطَةِ.