Stand in the fear of God and listen to the Holy Gospel. A reading from the Gospel according to our teacher Saint Luke the Evangelist, and the pure disciple. May his blessings be with us all.
قِفُوا بِخَوْفِ اللهِ، وَأَنْصِتُوا لِسَمَاعِ الإِنْجِيلِ الْمُقَدَّسِ. فَصْلٌ مِنْ بِشَارَةِ الإِنْجِيلِ لِمُعَلِّمِنَا مَارْ لوقا الْبَشِيرِ، التِّلْمِيذِ الطَّاهِرِ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
From the Psalms of our teacher David the prophet. May his blessings be with us all.
مِنْ مَزَامِيرِ تَرَاتِيلِ مُعَلِّمِنَا دَاوُدَ النَّبِيِّ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
Matins Psalm
المزمور
	Psalms 15:10-11
(مزامير 15: 10-11)
For You will not leave my soul in Sheol, Nor will You allow Your Holy One to see corruption. You will show me the path of life.
Ϫⲉ ⲛ̀ⲛⲉⲕⲥⲱϫⲡ ⲛ̀ⲧⲁⲯⲩⲭⲏ ϧⲉⲛ ⲁ̀ⲙⲉⲛϯ: ⲟⲩⲇⲉ ⲛ̀ⲛⲉⲕϯ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ ⲛ̀ⲧⲁⲕ ⲉ̀ⲛⲁⲩ ⲉ̀ⲡ̀ⲧⲁⲕⲟ: Ⲛⲓⲙⲱⲓⲧ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲡ̀ⲱⲛϧ: ⲁⲕⲧⲁⲙⲟⲓ ⲉ̀ⲣⲱⲟⲩ: ⲁ︦ⲗ︦.
لِأَنَّكَ لَا تَتْرُكُ نَفْسِي فِي الْجَحِيمِ. وَلَا تَدَعُ قُدُّوسَكَ يَرَى فَسَادًا. قَدْ عَرَّفْتَنِي، طُرُقَ الْحَيَاةِ.
People:
Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
الليلويا.
	Psalm Trailer for the Pope or a Bishop
(Ⲙⲁⲣⲟⲩϭⲁⲥϥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲧ̀ⲉⲕⲕ̀ⲗⲏⲥⲓⲁ̀...)
People:
Amen Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲙⲏⲛ Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
امين الليلويا.
Then the introduction to the Gospel is read.
ثم تقال مقدمة الأنجيل وهي:
Reader:
Blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord. Our Lord, God, Savior and King of us all, Jesus Christ, Son of the living God to whom is glory forever. Amen.
القارﺉُ:
مباركٌ الآتي باسمِ الربِّ إلهِ القواتِ، ربُّنا وإلهُنا ومخلصُنا وملكُنا كلِّنا، يسوعُ المسيحُ، ابنُ اللهِ الحيِّ، الذي لهُ المجدُ إلى الأبدِ. آمين.
Matins Gospel
الإنجيل
	Luke 20:27-38
(لوقا 20: 27-38)
27 Then some of the Sadducees, who deny that there is a resurrection, came to Him and asked Him,
Ⲉⲧⲁⲩⲓ̀ ⲇⲉ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ϩⲁⲛⲟⲩⲟⲛ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ϩⲁⲛⲥⲁⲇⲇⲟⲩⲕⲉⲟⲥ ⲛⲏⲉⲧϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ϫⲉ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲛ ⲁⲛⲁⲥⲧⲁⲥⲓⲥ ⲁⲩϣⲉⲛϥ.
27 وَدَنَا إِلَيْهِ قَوْمٌ مِنَ الصَّدُّوقِيِّينَ، الَّذِينَ يَقُولُونَ بِعَدَمِ الْقِيَامَةِ، وَسَأَلُوهُ،
28 saying: “Teacher, Moses wrote to us that if a man’s brother dies, having a wife, and he dies without children, his brother should take his wife and raise up offspring for his brother.
Ⲩ̀ϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ϫⲉ ⲫ̀ⲣⲉϥϯⲥ̀ⲃⲱ ⲁ̀ ⲙⲱⲩ̀ⲥⲏⲥ ⲥ̀ϧⲁⲓ ⲛⲁⲛ ϫⲉ ⲉ̀ϣⲱⲡ ⲁ̀ⲣⲉϣⲁⲛ ⲡ̀ⲥⲟⲛ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩⲁⲓ ⲙⲟⲩ ⲉ̀ⲟⲩⲟⲛⲧⲉϥ ⲥ̀ϩⲓⲙⲓ ⲙ̀ⲙⲁⲩ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲫⲁⲓ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲛⲧⲉϥ ϣⲏⲣⲓ ⲙ̀ⲙⲁⲩ ϩⲓⲛⲁ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲡⲉϥⲥⲟⲛ ϭⲓ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉϥⲥ̀ϩⲓⲙⲓ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉϥⲧⲟⲩⲛⲟⲥ ⲟⲩϫ̀ⲣⲟϫ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉϥⲥⲟⲛ.
28 قَائِلِينَ: " يَا مُعَلِّمُ، كَتَبَ لَنَا مُوسَى: إِنْ مَاتَ لِرَجُلٍ أَخٌ وَلَهُ اِمْرَأَةٌ، وَمَاتَ عَنْ غَيْرِ وَلَدٍ، فَلْيَأْخُذْ أَخُوهُ الْمَرْأَةَ وَيُقِمْ نَسْلًا لِأَخِيهِ.
29 Now there were seven brothers. And the first took a wife, and died without children.
Ⲛⲉ ⲟⲩⲟⲛ ⲍ︦ ⲟⲩⲛ ⲛ̀ⲥⲟⲛ ⲡⲉ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲡⲓϩⲟⲩⲓⲧ ⲉ̀ⲧⲁϥϭⲓⲥ̀ϩⲓⲙⲓ ⲁϥⲙⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲁϣⲏⲣⲓ.
29 وَكَانَ سَبْعَةُ إِخْوَةٍ. أَخَذَ أَوَّلُهُمُ اِمْرَأَةً وَمَاتَ مِنْ غَيْرِ وَلَدٍ،
30 And the second took her as wife, and he died childless.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲡⲓⲙⲁϩⲃ︦ ⲁϥϭⲓⲧⲥ.
30 فَأَخَذَ الثَّانِي الْمَرْأَةَ وَمَاتَ مِنْ غَيْرِ وَلَدٍ،
31 Then the third took her, and in like manner the seven also; and they left no children, and died.
Ⲛⲉⲙ ⲡⲓⲙⲁϩⲅ︦ ⲡⲁⲓⲣⲏϯ ⲇⲉ ϣⲁ ⲡⲓⲙⲁϩⲍ︦ ⲙ̀ⲡⲟⲩⲭⲁ ⲏⲣⲓ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁⲩⲙⲟⲩ.
31 ثُمَّ أَخَذَهَا الثَّالِثُ، وَكَذَلِكَ السَّبْعَةُ. وَلَمْ يُخَلِّفُوا نَسْلًا وَمَاتُوا.
32 Last of all the woman died also.
Ⲉ̀ⲡ̀ϧⲁⲉ ⲇⲉ ⲁⲥⲙⲟⲩ ϩⲱⲥ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ϯⲕⲉⲥ̀ϩⲓⲙⲓ.
32 وَفِي آخِرِ الْكُلِّ مَاتَتِ الْمَرْأَةُ أَيْضًا.
33 Therefore, in the resurrection, whose wife does she become? For all seven had her as wife.”
Ⲛ̀ϩ̀ⲣⲏⲓ ⲟⲩⲛ ϧⲉⲛ ϯⲁⲛⲁⲥⲧⲁⲥⲓⲥ ⲁⲥⲛⲁⲉⲣⲥ̀ϩⲓⲙⲓ ⲛ̀ⲛⲓⲙ ⲙⲙⲱⲟⲩ ⲁ ⲡⲓⲍ︦ ⲅⲁⲣ ϭⲓⲧⲥ ⲉⲩⲥ̀ϩⲓⲙⲓ.
33 فَفِي الْقِيَامَةِ، لِمَنْ مِنْهُمْ تَكُونُ الْمَرْأَةُ، لِأَنَّ السَّبْعَةَ اِتَّخَذُوهَا اِمْرَأَةً؟ "
34 Jesus answered and said to them, “The sons of this age marry and are given in marriage.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ⲛⲱⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ Ⲓⲏ︦ⲥ︦ ϫⲉ ⲛⲓϣⲏⲣⲓ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲡⲁⲓⲉⲛⲉϩ ϣⲁⲩϭⲓ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ϣⲁⲩ ϭⲓⲧⲟⲩ.
34 فَقَالَ لَهُمْ يَسُوعُ: " إِنَّ أَبْنَاءَ هَذَا الدَّهْرِ يَتَزَوَّجُونَ وَيَتَزَوَّجْنَ،
35 But those who are counted worthy to attain that age, and the resurrection from the dead, neither marry nor are given in marriage;
Ⲛⲏ ⲇⲉ ⲉⲧⲁⲩⲉⲣⲡ̀ⲉⲙⲡ̀ϣⲁ ⲙ̀ⲡⲓⲉⲛⲉϩ ⲉ̀ⲧⲉⲙ̀ⲙⲁⲩ ⲛⲉⲙ ϯⲁⲛⲁⲥⲧⲁⲥⲓⲥ ϯⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ϧⲉⲛ ⲛⲓⲣⲉϥⲙⲱⲟⲩⲧ ⲟⲩⲇⲉ ⲙ̀ⲡⲁⲩϭⲓ ⲟⲩⲇⲉ ⲙ̀ⲡⲁⲩ ϭⲓⲧⲟⲩ.
35 وَأَمَّا الَّذِينَ اِسْتَحَقُّوا الْفَوْزَ بِذَلِكَ الدَّهْرِ وَبِالْقِيَامَةِ مِنْ بَيْنِ الْأَمْوَاتِ، فَلَا يَتَزَوَّجُونَ وَلَا يَتَزَوَّجْنَ.
36 nor can they die anymore, for they are equal to the angels and are sons of God, being sons of the resurrection.
Ⲟⲩⲇⲉ ⲅⲁⲣ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲛ ϣ̀ϫⲟⲙ ⲛ̀ⲥⲉⲙⲟⲩ ϫⲉ ϩⲁⲛϩⲓⲥⲟⲥ ⲛ̀ⲁⲅⲅⲉⲗⲟⲥ ⲅⲁⲣ ⲛⲉ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ϩⲁⲛϣⲏⲣⲓ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲫϯ ⲛⲉ ⲉⲩⲟⲓ ⲛ̀ϣⲏⲣⲓ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ϯⲁⲛⲁⲥⲧⲁⲥⲓⲥ.
36 وَلَا يُمْكِنُ أَنْ يَمُوتُوا بَعْدُ، لِأَنَّهُمْ مُسَاوونَ الْمَلَائِكَةَ، وَهُمْ أَبْنَاءُ اللَّهِ، لِكَوْنِهِمْ أَبْنَاءَ الْقِيَامَةِ.
37 But even Moses showed in the burning bush passage that the dead are raised, when he called the Lord ‘the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob.’
Ⲟⲧⲓ ⲇⲉ ⲛⲓⲣⲉϥⲙⲱⲟⲩⲧ ⲛ̀ⲁⲧⲱⲟⲩⲛⲟⲩ ⲙⲱⲩ̀ⲥⲏⲥ ϩⲱϥ ⲁϥϯⲙⲏⲓⲛⲓ ϩⲓ ⲡⲓⲃⲁⲧⲟⲥ ⲙ̀ⲫ̀ⲣⲏϯ ⲉⲧⲉϥϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ϫⲉ Ⲡⲟ︦ⲥ︦ ϯ ⲛⲁⲃⲣⲁⲁⲙ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲫϯ ⲛ̀ Ⲓ̀ⲥⲁⲁⲕ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲫϯ ⲛ̀ⲓⲁⲕⲱⲃ.
37 فَأَمَّا أَنَّ الْمَوْتَى يَقُومُونَ، فَقَدْ بَيَّنَهُ مُوسَى أَيْضًا فِي أَمْرِ الْعُلَّيْقَةِ إِذْ قَالَ: إِنَّ الرَّبَّ هُوَ إِلَهُ إِبْرَاهِيمَ وَإِلَهُ إِسْحَاقَ وَإِلَهُ يَعْقُوبَ.
38 For He is not the God of the dead but of the living, for all live to Him.”
Ⲫϯ ⲫⲁ ⲛⲏⲉⲑⲙⲱⲟⲩⲧ ⲁⲛ ⲡⲉ ⲁⲗⲗⲁ ⲫⲁ ⲛⲏⲉⲧⲟⲛϧ ⲡⲉ ⲥⲉⲟⲛϧ ⲅⲁⲣ ⲛⲁϥ ⲧⲏⲣⲟⲩ.
38 وَهُوَ لَيْسَ إِلَهَ أَمْوَاتٍ وَإِنَّمَا هُوَ إِلَهُ أَحْيَاءٍ، لِأَنَّ الْجَمِيعَ يَحْيَوْنَ لَهُ ".