Stand in the fear of God and listen to the Holy Gospel. A reading from the Gospel according to our teacher Saint Luke the Evangelist, and the pure disciple. May his blessings be with us all.
قِفُوا بِخَوْفِ اللهِ، وَأَنْصِتُوا لِسَمَاعِ الإِنْجِيلِ الْمُقَدَّسِ. فَصْلٌ مِنْ بِشَارَةِ الإِنْجِيلِ لِمُعَلِّمِنَا مَارْ لوقا الْبَشِيرِ، التِّلْمِيذِ الطَّاهِرِ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
From the Psalms of our teacher David the prophet. May his blessings be with us all.
مِنْ مَزَامِيرِ تَرَاتِيلِ مُعَلِّمِنَا دَاوُدَ النَّبِيِّ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
Matins Psalm
المزمور
	Psalms 88:9,1
(مزامير 88: 9,1)
The heavens are Yours, the earth also is Yours; The world and all its fullness, You have founded them. I will sing of the mercies of the Lord forever; With my mouth will I make known Your faithfulness to all generations.
Ⲛⲟⲩⲕ ⲛⲉ ⲛⲓⲫⲏⲟⲩⲓ̀ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲫⲱⲕ ⲟⲛ ⲡⲉ ⲡ̀ⲕⲁϩⲓ: ϯⲟⲓⲕⲟⲩⲙⲉⲛⲏ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲡⲉⲥϫⲱⲕ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ⲛ̀ⲑⲟⲕ ⲁⲕϩⲓⲥⲉⲛϯ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ. Ⲛⲉⲕⲛⲁⲓ Ⲡ̀ⲟ︦ⲥ︦ ϯⲛⲁϩⲱⲥ ⲙ̀ⲙⲱⲟⲩ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ: ⲓⲥϫⲉⲛ ϫⲱⲟⲩ ϣⲁ ϫⲱⲟⲩ ϯⲛⲁϫⲱ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉⲕⲙⲉⲑⲙⲏⲓ ϧⲉⲛ ⲣⲱⲓ. Ⲁ︦ⲗ︦.
لَكَ السَّمَاوَاتُ وَلَكَ الْأَرْضُ أَيْضًا. أَنْتَ أَسَّسْتَ الْمَسْكُونَةَ وَكَمَالَهَا. مَرَاحِمُكَ يَا رَبُّ أُسَبِّحُها إِلَى الدَّهْرِ. مِنْ جِيلٍ إِلَى جِيلٍ أُخْبِرُ بِحَقِّكَ بِفَمِي. هَلِّلُويَا.
People:
Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
الليلويا.
	Psalm Trailer for the Pope or a Bishop
(Ⲙⲁⲣⲟⲩϭⲁⲥϥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲧ̀ⲉⲕⲕ̀ⲗⲏⲥⲓⲁ̀...)
People:
Amen Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲙⲏⲛ Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
امين الليلويا.
Then the introduction to the Gospel is read.
ثم تقال مقدمة الأنجيل وهي:
Reader:
Blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord. Our Lord, God, Savior and King of us all, Jesus Christ, Son of the living God to whom is glory forever. Amen.
القارﺉُ:
مباركٌ الآتي باسمِ الربِّ إلهِ القواتِ، ربُّنا وإلهُنا ومخلصُنا وملكُنا كلِّنا، يسوعُ المسيحُ، ابنُ اللهِ الحيِّ، الذي لهُ المجدُ إلى الأبدِ. آمين.
Matins Gospel
الإنجيل
	Luke 17:11-19
(لوقا 17: 11-19)
11 Now it happened as He went to Jerusalem that He passed through the midst of Samaria and Galilee.
Ⲁⲥϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲉϥϣⲉ ⲛⲁϥ ⲉ̀ϩ̀ⲣⲏⲓ ⲉ̀ⲓ̀ⲗ︦ⲏ︦ⲙ︦ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛ̀ⲑⲟϥ ⲛⲁϥⲥⲓⲛⲓⲱⲟⲩ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ⲟⲩⲧⲉ ⲑ̀ⲙⲏϯ ⲛ̀ⲧ̀ⲁⲥⲁⲙⲁⲣⲓⲁ̀ ⲛⲉⲙ ϯⲅⲁⲗⲓⲗⲉⲁ̀.
11 وَحَدَثَ فِيمَا هُوَ ذَاهِبٌ إِلَى أُورُشَلِيمَ، اجْتَازَ فِي وَسَطِ السَّامِرَةِ وَالْجَلِيلِ.
12 Then as He entered a certain village, there met Him ten men who were lepers, who stood afar off.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉϥⲛⲁϣⲉ ⲛⲁϥ ⲉ̀ϧⲟⲩⲛ ⲉ̀ⲟⲩϯⲙⲓ ⲁⲩⲓ̀ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ⲉ̀ϩ̀ⲣⲁϥ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲓ︦ ⲛ̀ⲣⲱⲙⲓ ⲛ̀ⲕⲁⲕⲥⲉϩⲧ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛⲁⲩⲟϩⲓ ⲉ̀ⲣⲁⲧⲟⲩ ϩⲓⲫⲟⲩⲉⲓ.
12 وَفِيمَا هُوَ دَاخِلٌ إِلَى قَرْيَةٍ اسْتَقْبَلَهُ عَشَرَةُ رِجَالٍ بُرْصٍ، فَوَقَفُوا مِنْ بَعِيدٍ
13 And they lifted up their voices and said, “Jesus, Master, have mercy on us!”
Ⲩⲟϩ ⲛ̀ⲑⲱⲟⲩ ⲛⲁⲩϭⲓⲥⲓ ⲛ̀ⲧⲟⲩⲥ̀ⲙⲏ ⲉⲩϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ϫⲉ Ⲓⲏ︦ⲥ︦ ⲡⲓⲣⲉϥϯⲥ̀ⲃⲱ ⲛⲁⲓ ⲛⲁⲛ.
13 وَرَفَعُوا صَوْتَهُمْ قَائِلِينَ: " يَا يَسُوعُ، يَا مُعَلِّمُ، ارْحَمْنَا! ".
14 So when He saw them, He said to them, “Go, show yourselves to the priests.” And so it was that as they went, they were cleansed.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉⲧⲁϥⲛⲁⲩ ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ⲛⲱⲟⲩ ϫⲉ ⲙⲁϣⲉ ⲛⲱⲧⲉⲛ ⲁⲧⲁⲙⲉ ⲡⲓⲟⲩⲏⲃ ⲉ̀ⲣⲱⲧⲉⲛ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁⲥϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲉⲩϣⲉ ⲛⲱⲟⲩ ⲁⲩⲧⲟⲩⲃⲟ.
14 فَنَظَرَ وَقَالَ لَهُمُ: " اِمْضُوا فَأَرُوا الْكَاهِنَ ذَوَاتِكُمْ ". وَفِيمَا هُمْ مُنْطَلِقُونَ طَهَرُوا.
15 And one of them, when he saw that he was healed, returned, and with a loud voice glorified God,
Ⲟⲩⲁⲓ ⲇⲉ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ⲛ̀ϧⲏⲧⲟⲩ ⲉⲧⲁϥⲛⲁⲩ ϫⲉ ⲁϥⲗⲟϫϥ ⲁϥⲧⲁⲥⲑⲟ ⲉⲙ ⲟⲩⲛⲓϣϯ ⲛ̀ⲥ̀ⲙⲏ ⲉϥϯⲱⲟⲩ ⲙ̀ⲫϯ.
15 فَوَاحِدٌ مِنْهُمْ لَمَّا رَأَى أَنَّهُ شُفِيَ، رَجَعَ يُمَجِّدُ اللَّهَ بِصَوْتٍ عَظِيمٍ،
16 and fell down on his face at His feet, giving Him thanks. And he was a Samaritan.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁϥϩⲓⲧϥ ⲉ̀ϫⲉⲛ ⲡⲉϥϩⲟ ϧⲁⲧⲉⲛ ⲛⲉϥϭⲁⲗⲁⲩϫ ⲉϥϣⲉⲡϩ̀ⲙⲟⲧ ⲛ̀ⲧⲟⲧϥ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲫⲁⲓ ⲛⲉ ⲩⲥⲁⲙⲁⲣⲓⲧⲏⲥ ⲡⲉ.
16 وَخَرَّ عَلَى وَجْهِهِ عِنْدَ رِجْلَيْهِ شَاكِرًا لَهُ، وَكَانَ سَامِرِيًّا.
17 So Jesus answered and said, “Were there not ten cleansed? But where are the nine?
Ⲁϥⲉⲣⲟⲩⲱ ⲇⲉ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ Ⲓⲏ︦ⲥ︦ ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ϫⲉ ⲙⲏ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉ ⲡⲓⲓ︦ ⲧⲟⲩⲃⲟ ⲡⲓⲕⲉⲑ︦ ⲁⲩⲑⲱⲛ.
17 فَأَجَابَ يَسُوعُ وَقَالَ: " أَلَيْسَ الْعَشَرَةُ قَدْ طَهَرُوا؟ فَأَيْنَ التِّسْعَةُ الْآخَرُونَ؟
18 Were there not any found who returned to give glory to God except this foreigner?”
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲙ̀ⲡⲟⲩϫⲉⲙⲟⲩ ⲉⲁⲩⲕⲟⲧⲟⲩ ⲉ̀ϯ ⲱⲟⲩ ⲙ̀ⲫϯ ⲉ̀ⲃⲏⲗ ⲉ̀ⲫⲁⲓ ⲁⲗⲗⲟⲅⲉⲛⲏⲥ.
18 أَمَا كَانَ فِيهِمْ مَنْ يَرْجِعُ لِيُمَجِّدَ اللَّهَ غَيْرُ هَذَا الْغَرِيبِ الْجِنْسِ؟ "
19 And He said to him, “Arise, go your way. Your faith has made you well.”
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ⲛⲁϥ ϫⲉ ⲧⲱⲛⲕ ⲙⲁϣⲉ ⲛⲁⲕ ⲡⲉⲕⲛⲁϩϯ ⲡⲉⲧⲁϥⲛⲁϩⲙⲉⲕ.
19 ثُمَّ قَالَ لَهُ: " قُمْ وَامْضِ، إِيمَانُكَ خَلَّصَكَ ".