Stand in the fear of God and listen to the Holy Gospel. A reading from the Gospel according to our teacher Saint Matthew the Evangelist, and the pure disciple. May his blessings be with us all.
قِفُوا بِخَوْفِ اللهِ، وَأَنْصِتُوا لِسَمَاعِ الإِنْجِيلِ الْمُقَدَّسِ. فَصْلٌ مِنْ بِشَارَةِ الإِنْجِيلِ لِمُعَلِّمِنَا مَارْ متى الْبَشِيرِ، التِّلْمِيذِ الطَّاهِرِ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
From the Psalms of our teacher David the prophet. May his blessings be with us all.
مِنْ مَزَامِيرِ تَرَاتِيلِ مُعَلِّمِنَا دَاوُدَ النَّبِيِّ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
Matins Psalm
المزمور
	Psalms 114:6
(مزامير 114: 6)
Return to your rest, O my soul, For the Lord has dealt bountifully with you. For You have delivered my soul from death, My eyes from tears.
Ⲕⲟⲧϯ ⲧⲁⲯⲩⲭⲏ ⲉ̀ⲡⲉⲙⲁⲛ̀ⲉⲙⲧⲟⲛ: ϫⲉ ⲁ̀ Ⲡⲟ︦ⲥ︦ ⲉⲣⲡⲉⲑⲛⲁⲛⲉϥ ⲛⲏⲓ: ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁϥⲛⲟϩⲉⲙ ⲛ̀ⲧⲁⲯⲩⲭⲏ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗϧⲉⲛ ⲫ̀ⲙⲟⲩ: ⲛⲉⲙ ⲛⲁⲃⲁⲗ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗϩⲁ ϩⲁⲛⲉⲣⲙⲱⲟⲩⲓ̀: ⲁ︦ⲗ︦.
اِرْجِعِي يَا نَفْسِي إِلَى مَوْضِعِ رَاحَتِكِ، لِأَنَّ الرَّبَّ قَدْ أَحْسَنَ إِلَيَّ. وَأَنْقَذَ نَفْسِي مِنَ الْمَوْتِ، وَعَيَنِيَّ مِنَ الْعَبَرَاتِ.
People:
Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
الليلويا.
	Psalm Trailer for the Pope or a Bishop
(Ⲙⲁⲣⲟⲩϭⲁⲥϥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲧ̀ⲉⲕⲕ̀ⲗⲏⲥⲓⲁ̀...)
People:
Amen Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲙⲏⲛ Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
امين الليلويا.
Then the introduction to the Gospel is read.
ثم تقال مقدمة الأنجيل وهي:
Reader:
Blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord. Our Lord, God, Savior and King of us all, Jesus Christ, Son of the living God to whom is glory forever. Amen.
القارﺉُ:
مباركٌ الآتي باسمِ الربِّ إلهِ القواتِ، ربُّنا وإلهُنا ومخلصُنا وملكُنا كلِّنا، يسوعُ المسيحُ، ابنُ اللهِ الحيِّ، الذي لهُ المجدُ إلى الأبدِ. آمين.
Matins Gospel
الإنجيل
	Matthew 15:39-16:12
(متى 15: 39-16: 12)
39 And He sent away the multitude, got into the boat, and came to the region of Magdala.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉ̀ⲧⲁϥⲭⲁ ⲛⲓⲙⲏϣ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ⲁϥⲁ̀ⲗⲏⲓ ⲉ̀ⲡⲓϫⲟⲓ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁϥⲓ̀ ⲉ̀ⲛⲓϭⲓⲏ̀ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ Ⲙⲁⲅⲇⲁⲗⲁⲛ
39 ثُمَّ صَرَفَ الْجَمْعَ، وَرَكِبَ السَّفِينَةَ وَجَاءَ إِلَى تُخُومِ مَجْدَلَ.
1 Then the Pharisees and Sadducees came, and testing Him asked that He would show them a sign from heaven.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁⲩⲓ̀ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲛⲓⲪⲁⲣⲓⲥⲉⲟⲥ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲛⲓⲤⲁⲇⲇⲟⲩⲕⲉⲟⲥ ⲉⲩⲉⲣⲡⲓⲣⲁⲍⲓⲛ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟϥ ⲛⲁⲩϣⲓⲛⲓ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟϥ ⲉ̀ⲧⲁⲙⲱⲟⲩ ⲉ̀ⲟⲩⲙⲏⲓⲛⲓ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗϧⲉⲛ ⲧ̀ⲫⲉ.
1 وَدَنَا إِلَيْهِ الْفَرِّيسِيُّونَ وَالصَّدُّوقِيُّونَ لِيُجَرِّبُوهُ، فَسَأَلُوهُ أَنْ يُرِيَهُمْ آيَةً مِنَ السَّمَاءِ.
2 He answered and said to them, “When it is evening you say, ‘It will be fair weather, for the sky is red’;
Ⲛ̀ⲑⲟϥ ⲇⲉ ⲁϥⲉ̀ⲣⲟⲩⲱ̀ ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ⲛⲱⲟⲩ ϫⲉ ⲉ̀ϣⲱⲡ ⲁϥϣⲁⲛⲓ̀ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ϩⲁⲛⲁ̀ⲣⲟⲩϩⲓ ⲧⲉⲧⲉⲛϫⲟⲥ ϫⲉ ⲧ̀ⲫⲉ ⲟⲩϫⲁⲙⲏ ⲉⲥⲑ̀ⲣⲟϣⲣⲉϣ.
2 فَأَجَابَهُمْ قَائِلًا: " إِذَا كَانَ الْمَسَاءُ قُلْتُمْ صَحْوٌ، لِأَنَّ السَّمَاءَ مُحْمَرَّةٌ.
3 and in the morning, ‘It will be foul weather today, for the sky is red and threatening.’ Hypocrites! You know how to discern the face of the sky, but you cannot discern the signs of the times.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ϩⲁⲛⲁ̀ⲧⲟⲟⲩⲓ̀ ⲧⲉⲧⲉⲛϫⲟⲥ ϫⲉ ⲫⲟⲟⲩ ⲧ̀ⲫ̀ⲣⲱ ⲉⲑⲃⲉ ⲡⲓⲑ̀ⲣⲟϣⲣⲉϣ ⲛ̀ⲧ̀ⲫⲉ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲟⲩⲅ̀ⲛⲟⲫⲟⲥ ⲛⲓϣⲟⲃⲓ ⲧⲉⲧⲉⲛⲥⲱⲟⲩⲛ ⲉ̀ⲥⲟⲙⲥ ⲉ̀ⲧ̀ⲫⲉ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲫ̀ⲙⲏⲓⲛⲓ ⲙ̀ⲡⲁⲓⲥⲏⲟⲩ ⲫⲁⲓ ⲧⲉⲧⲉⲛⲥⲱⲟⲩⲛ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟϥ ⲁⲛ.
3 وَفِي الصَّبَاحِ تَقُولُونَ: الْيَوْمَ شِتَاءٌ لِأَنَّ السَّمَاءَ مُحْمَرَّةٌ بِعُبُوسَةٍ. يَا مُرَاؤُونَ! تَعْرِفُونَ أَنْ تُمَيِّزُوا وَجْهَ السَّمَاءِ، وَعَلَامَاتُ الْأَزْمِنَةِ لَا تَسْتَطِيعُونَ أَنْ تَعْرِفُوهَا!
4 A wicked and adulterous generation seeks after a sign, and no sign shall be given to it except the sign of the prophet Jonah.” And He left them and departed.
Ϫⲉ ⲡⲓϫⲱⲟⲩ ⲉⲧϩⲱⲟⲩ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛ̀ⲛⲱⲓⲕ ϥ̀ⲕⲱϯ ⲛ̀ⲥⲁ ⲟⲩⲙⲏⲓⲛⲓ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲟⲩⲙⲏⲓⲛⲓ ⲛ̀ⲛⲟⲩⲧⲏⲓϥ ⲛⲁϥ ⲉ̀ⲃⲏⲗ ⲉ̀ⲡⲓⲙⲏⲓⲛⲓ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ Ⲓⲱⲛⲁ ⲡⲓⲡ̀ⲣⲟⲫⲏⲧⲏⲥ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉ̀ⲧⲁϥⲭⲁⲩ ⲁϥϣⲉⲛⲁϥ.
4 إِنَّ الجِيلَ الشِّرِّيرَ الفَاسِقَ يَطْلُبُ آيَةً، وَلَا تُعْطَى لَهُ آيَةٌ إِلَّا آيَةَ يُونَانَ النَّبِيِّ ". ثُمَّ تَرَكَهُمْ وَمَضَى.
5 Now when His disciples had come to the other side, they had forgotten to take bread.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉ̀ⲧⲁϥⲓ̀ ⲉ̀ⲙⲏⲣ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲛⲉϥⲙⲁⲑⲏⲧⲏⲥ ⲁⲩⲉⲣⲡⲱⲃϣ ⲉ̀ϣⲉⲡ ⲱⲓⲕ ⲛⲱⲟⲩ.
5 وَلَمَّا جَاءَ تَلَامِيذُهُ إِلَى الْعَبْرِ نَسُوا أَنْ يَأْخُذُوا خُبْزًا.
6 Then Jesus said to them, “Take heed and beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and the Sadducees.”
Ⲡⲉϫⲉ Ⲓⲏ︦ⲥ︦ ⲇⲉ ⲛⲱⲟⲩ ϫⲉ ⲁ̀ⲛⲁⲩ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲙⲁϩⲑⲏⲧⲉⲛ ⲉ̀ⲣⲱⲧⲉⲛ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗϩⲁ ⲡ̀ϣⲉⲙⲏⲣ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲛⲓⲪⲁⲣⲓⲥⲉⲟⲥ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲛⲓⲤⲁⲇⲇⲟⲩⲕⲉⲟⲥ.
6 وَقَالَ لَهُمْ يَسُوعُ: " انْظُرُوا، وَتَحَرَّزُوا مِنْ خَمِيرِ الْفَرِّيسِيِّينَ وَالصَّدُّوقِيِّينَ ".
7 And they reasoned among themselves, saying, “It is because we have taken no bread.”
Ⲛ̀ⲑⲱⲟⲩ ⲇⲉ ⲛⲁⲩⲙⲟⲕⲙⲉⲕ ⲛ̀ϧ̀ⲣⲏⲓ ⲛ̀ϧⲏⲧⲟⲩ ⲉⲩϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ϫⲉ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉⲛϭⲓ ⲱⲓⲕ ⲛⲉⲙⲁⲛ.
7 فَفَكَّرُوا فِي أَنْفُسِهِمْ قَائِلِينَ: " إِنَّنَا لَمْ نَأْخُذْ خُبْزًا ".
8 But Jesus, being aware of it, said to them, “O you of little faith, why do you reason among yourselves because you have brought no bread?
Ⲉ̀ⲧⲁϥⲉ̀ⲙⲓ ⲇⲉ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ Ⲓⲏ︦ⲥ︦ ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ⲛⲱⲟⲩ ϫⲉ ⲉⲑⲃⲉ ⲟⲩ ⲧⲉⲧⲉⲛⲙⲟⲕⲙⲉⲕ ϧⲉⲛ ⲑⲏⲛⲟⲩ ⲛⲁ ⲡⲓⲕⲟⲩϫⲓ ⲛ̀ⲛⲁϩϯ ϫⲉ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲛ ⲧⲉⲧⲉⲛ ⲱⲓⲕ ⲙ̀ⲙⲁⲩ.
8 فَعَلِمَ يَسُوعُ وَقَالَ لَهُمْ: " لِمَاذَا تُفَكِّرُونَ فِي نُفُوسِكُمْ يَا قَلِيلِي الْإِيمَانِ أَنَّكُمْ لَيْسَ مَعَكُمْ خُبْزٌ؟
9 Do you not yet understand, or remember the five loaves of the five thousand and how many baskets you took up?
Ⲙ̀ⲡⲁⲧⲉⲧⲉⲛⲉ̀ⲙⲓ ⲟⲩⲇⲉ ⲧⲉⲧⲉⲛⲓ̀ⲣⲓ ⲙ̀ⲫ̀ⲙⲉⲩⲓ ⲁⲛ ⲙ̀ⲡⲓⲉ︦ ⲛ̀ⲱⲓⲕ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲡⲓⲉ︦ ⲛ̀ϣⲟ ϫⲉ ⲁ̀ⲧⲉⲧⲉⲛϭⲓ ⲟⲩⲏⲣ ⲛ̀ⲕⲟⲧ.
9 أَمَا تَفْهَمُونَ حَتَّى الْآنَ؟ وَلَا تَذْكُرُونَ الْخَمْسَةَ الْأَرْغِفَةَ لِلْخَمْسَةِ الْآلَافِ وَكَمْ قُفَّةً أَخَذْتُمْ؟
10 Nor the seven loaves of the four thousand and how many large baskets you took up?
Ⲟⲩⲇⲉ ⲡⲓⲍ︦ ⲛ̀ⲱⲓⲕ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲡⲓⲇ︦ ⲛ̀ϣⲟ ϫⲉ ⲁ̀ⲧⲉⲧⲉⲛϭⲓ ⲟⲩⲏⲣ ⲙ̀ⲃⲓⲣ.
10 وَالسَّبْعَةَ الْأَرْغِفَةَ لِلْأَرْبَعَةِ الْآلَافِ وَكَمْ سَلَّةً أَخَذْتُمْ؟
11 How is it you do not understand that I did not speak to you concerning bread?—but to beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and Sadducees.”
Ⲡⲱⲥ ⲧⲉⲧⲉⲛⲕⲁϯ ⲁⲛ ϫⲉ ⲛⲁⲓϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ⲛⲱⲧⲉⲛ ⲁⲛ ⲉⲑⲃⲉ ⲡⲓⲱⲓⲕ ⲁ̀ⲣⲉϩ ⲇⲉ ⲉ̀ⲣⲱⲧⲉⲛ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗϩⲁ ⲡ̀ϣⲉⲙⲏⲣ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲛⲓⲪⲁⲣⲓⲥⲉⲟⲥ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲛⲓⲤⲁⲇⲇⲟⲩⲕⲉⲟⲥ.
11 كَيْفَ لَا تَفْهَمُونَ أَنِّي لَيْسَ مِنْ أَجْلِ الْخُبْزِ قُلْتُ لَكُمْ: اِحْذَرُوا مِنْ خَمِيرِ الْفَرِّيسِيِّينَ وَالصَّدُّوقِيِّينَ ".
12 Then they understood that He did not tell them to beware of the leaven of bread, but of the doctrine of the Pharisees and Sadducees.
Ⲧⲟⲧⲉ ⲁⲩⲕⲁϯ ϫⲉ ⲛⲉⲧⲁϥϫⲟⲥ ⲛⲱⲟⲩ ⲁⲛ ϫⲉ ⲁ̀ⲣⲉϩ ⲉ̀ⲣⲱⲧⲉⲛ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗϩⲁ ⲡ̀ϣⲉⲙⲏⲣ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲛⲓⲱⲓⲕ ⲁⲗⲗⲁ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗϩⲁ ϯⲥ̀ⲃⲱ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲛⲓⲪⲁⲣⲓⲥⲉⲟⲥ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲛⲓⲤⲁⲇⲇⲟⲩⲕⲉⲟⲥ.
12 حِينَئِذٍ فَهِمُوا أَنَّهُ لَمْ يُوصِهِمْ أَنْ يَتَحَذَّرُوا مِنْ خَمِيرِ الْخُبْزِ، بَلْ مِنْ تَعْلِيمِ الْفَرِّيسِيِّينَ وَالصَّدُّوقِيِّينَ.