Stand in the fear of God and listen to the Holy Gospel. A reading from the Gospel according to our teacher Saint Luke the Evangelist, and the pure disciple. May his blessings be with us all.
قِفُوا بِخَوْفِ اللهِ، وَأَنْصِتُوا لِسَمَاعِ الإِنْجِيلِ الْمُقَدَّسِ. فَصْلٌ مِنْ بِشَارَةِ الإِنْجِيلِ لِمُعَلِّمِنَا مَارْ لوقا الْبَشِيرِ، التِّلْمِيذِ الطَّاهِرِ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
From the Psalms of our teacher David the prophet. May his blessings be with us all.
مِنْ مَزَامِيرِ تَرَاتِيلِ مُعَلِّمِنَا دَاوُدَ النَّبِيِّ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
Matins Psalm
المزمور
	Psalms 17:38, 41
(مزامير 17: 38, 41)
I have pursued my enemies and overtaken them; Neither did I turn back again till they were destroyed. You have also given me the necks of my enemies, So that I destroyed those who hated me.
Ⲉⲓⲉ̀ϭⲟϫⲓ ⲛ̀ⲥⲁ ⲛⲁϫⲁϫⲓ ⲉⲓⲉ̀ⲧⲁϩⲱⲟⲩ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛ̀ⲛⲁⲕⲟⲧⲧ ⲉ̀ⲫⲁϩⲟⲩ ϣⲁ ⲧⲟⲩⲙⲟⲩⲛⲕ: Ⲁⲕϯⲛⲏⲓ ⲛ̀ⲛⲁϫⲁϫⲓ ⲉⲩⲣⲁϧⲧ ⲉ̀ϫⲉⲛ ⲡⲟⲩⲥⲟⲓ: ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛⲏⲉⲑⲙⲟⲥϯ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲓ ⲁⲕϥⲟⲧⲟⲩ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ: ⲁ︦ⲗ︦.
أَطْرُدُ أَعْدَائِي فَأُدْرِكُهُمْ، وَلَا أَرْجِعُ حَتَّى أُفْنِيَهُمْ. أَعْطَيْتَنِي الظَّفَرَ عَلَى أَعْدَائِي، ومُبْغِضِيَّ اِسْتَأْصَلْتَهُمْ.
People:
Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
الليلويا.
	Psalm Trailer for the Pope or a Bishop
(Ⲙⲁⲣⲟⲩϭⲁⲥϥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲧ̀ⲉⲕⲕ̀ⲗⲏⲥⲓⲁ̀...)
People:
Amen Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲙⲏⲛ Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
امين الليلويا.
Then the introduction to the Gospel is read.
ثم تقال مقدمة الأنجيل وهي:
Reader:
Blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord. Our Lord, God, Savior and King of us all, Jesus Christ, Son of the living God to whom is glory forever. Amen.
القارﺉُ:
مباركٌ الآتي باسمِ الربِّ إلهِ القواتِ، ربُّنا وإلهُنا ومخلصُنا وملكُنا كلِّنا، يسوعُ المسيحُ، ابنُ اللهِ الحيِّ، الذي لهُ المجدُ إلى الأبدِ. آمين.
Matins Gospel
الإنجيل
	Luke 14:16-24
(لوقا 14: 16-24)
16 Then He said to him, “A certain man gave a great supper and invited many,
Ⲛ̀ⲑⲟϥ ⲇⲉ ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ⲛⲁϥ ϫⲉ ⲟⲩⲣⲱⲙⲓ ⲉ̀ⲁϥⲓ̀ⲣⲓ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩⲛⲓϣϯ ⲛ̀ⲇⲓⲡⲛⲟⲛ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ϥⲑⲁϩⲉⲙ ⲟⲩⲙⲏϣ.
16 فَقَالَ لَهُ: " إِنْسَانٌ صَنَعَ وَلِيمَةً عَظِيمَةً وَدَعَا كَثِيرِينَ،
17 and sent his servant at supper time to say to those who were invited, ‘Come, for all things are now ready.’
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁϥⲟⲩⲱⲣⲡ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉϥⲃⲱⲕ ⲙ̀ⲫ̀ⲛⲁⲩ ⲛ̀ⲇⲓⲡⲛⲟⲛ ⲉ̀ϫⲟⲥ ⲛ̀ⲛⲏⲉⲧⲑⲁϩⲉⲙ ⲉⲑⲣⲟⲩⲓ̀ ϫⲉ ϩⲏⲇⲏ ϩⲱⲃ ⲛⲓⲃⲉⲛ ⲉⲥⲉⲃⲧⲱⲧ.
17 وَأَرْسَلَ عَبْدَهُ في سَاعَةِ الْعَشَاءِ لِيَقُولَ لِلْمَدْعُوِّينَ: تَعَالَوْا لِأَنَّ كُلَّ شَيْءٍ قَدْ أُعِدَّ.
18 But they all with one accord began to make excuses. The first said to him, ‘I have bought a piece of ground, and I must go and see it. I ask you to have me excused.’
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁⲩⲉⲣϩⲏⲧⲥ ⲛ̀ⲉⲣⲡⲁⲣⲉⲧⲓⲥⲑⲉ ϧⲉⲛ ⲟⲩϧ̀ⲣⲱⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩⲱⲧ ⲧⲏⲣⲟⲩ ⲡⲓϩⲟⲩⲓⲧ ⲁϥϫⲟⲥ ϫⲉ ⲁⲓϣⲱⲡ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩⲓⲟϩⲓ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲩⲟⲛ ⲁ̀ⲛⲁⲅⲕⲏ ⲧⲟⲓ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟⲓ ⲉⲑⲣⲓϣⲉ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ⲛ̀ⲧⲁⲛⲁⲩ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟϥ ϯϯϩⲟ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟⲕ ⲭⲁⲧ ⲛ̀ⲧⲟⲧⲕ ϩⲱⲥ ⲛ̀ϯⲛⲏⲟⲩ ⲁⲛ.
18 فَابْتَدَأوا جَمِيعًا يَسْتَعْفُونَ بِصَوْتٍ وَاحِدٍ. فَقَالَ الأوَّلُ: إنِّي اشْتَرَيْتُ حَقْلًا، وأَنَا مُضْطَرٌّ أَنْ أَخْرُجَ وَأَنْظُرَهُ. أَسْأَلُكَ أَنْ تُعْفِيَنِي؛ لأنِّي لَا أَسْتَطِيعُ أَنْ آتِيَ.
19 And another said, ‘I have bought five yoke of oxen, and I am going to test them. I ask you to have me excused.’
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲕⲉⲟⲩⲁⲓ ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ϫⲉ ⲁⲓϣⲉⲡ ︦ ⲛϩⲉⲃⲓ ⲛ̀ⲉ̀ϩⲉ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ϯⲛⲁϣⲉ ⲛⲏⲓ ⲛ̀ⲧⲁⲉⲣⲇⲟⲕⲓⲙⲁⲍⲓⲛ ⲙ̀ⲙⲱⲟⲩ ϯϯϩⲟ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟⲕ ⲭⲁⲧ ⲛ̀ⲧⲟⲧⲕ ϩⲱⲥ ϯⲛⲏⲟⲩ ⲁⲛ.
19 وَقَالَ آخَرُ: إنِّي اشْتَرَيْتُ خَمْسَةَ أَزْوَاجِ بَقَرٍ، وَأَنَا مَاضٍ لأَمْتَحِنَهَا. أَسْأَلُكَ أَنْ تُعْفِيَنِي؛ لأنِّي لَا أَسْتَطِيعُ أَنْ آتِيَ.
20 Still another said, ‘I have married a wife, and therefore I cannot come.’
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲕⲉⲟⲩⲁⲓ ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ⲉ ⲁⲓϭⲓ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩⲥ̀ϩⲓⲙⲓ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉⲑⲃⲉⲫⲁⲓ ϯⲛⲁⲓ̀ ⲁⲛ.
20 وَقَالَ آخَرُ: إنِّي تَزَوَّجْتُ بِامْرَأَةٍ، فَلِذلِكَ لَا أَقْدِرُ أَنْ أَجِيءَ.
21 So that servant came and reported these things to his master. Then the master of the house, being angry, said to his servant, ‘Go out quickly into the streets and lanes of the city, and bring in here the poor and the maimed and the lame and the blind.’
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉⲧⲁϥⲓ̀ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲡⲓⲃⲱⲕ ⲁϥⲧⲁⲙⲉ ⲡⲉϥϫ︦ⲥ︦ ⲧⲟⲧⲉ ⲉⲧⲁϥϫⲱⲛⲧ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲡⲓⲛⲉⲃⲏⲓ ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉϥⲃⲱⲕ ϫⲉ ⲙⲁϣⲉ ⲛⲁⲕ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ⲛ̀ⲭⲱⲗⲉⲙ ⲉ̀ⲛⲓⲡ̀ⲗⲁⲧⲓⲁ̀ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲛⲓϧⲓⲣ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ϯ ⲃⲁⲕⲓ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛⲓϩⲏⲕⲓ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲛⲓⲁⲧϫⲟⲙ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲛⲓⲃⲉⲗⲗⲉⲩ ⲛⲓⲧⲟⲩ ⲉ̀ϧⲟⲩⲛ ⲉ̀ⲡⲁⲓⲙⲁ.
21 فَجَاءَ الْعَبْدُ وَأَخْبَرَ سَيِّدَهُ بِذلِكَ. حِينَئِذٍ غَضِبَ رَبُّ الْبَيْتِ، وَقَالَ لِعَبْدِهِ: اخْرُجْ سَرِيعًا إِلَى الأَزِقَّةِ وَشَوَارِعِ الْمَدِينَةِ، وَأَدْخِلْ إِلَى هذَا الْمَكَانِ الْمَسَاكِينَ والضُّعَفَاءَ وَالْعُمْيَ وَالْعُرْجَ.
22 And the servant said, ‘Master, it is done as you commanded, and still there is room.’
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲡⲉϫⲉ ⲡⲓⲃⲱⲕ ϫⲉ Ⲡⲟ︦ⲥ︦ ⲁϥϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲫⲏⲉⲧⲁⲕⲟⲩⲁϩⲥⲁϩⲛⲓ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟϥ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉ̀ⲧⲓ ⲟⲩⲟⲛ ⲙⲁ.
22 فَقَالَ الْعَبْدُ: يَا سَيِّدُ، قَدْ صَارَ كَمَا أَمَرْتَ، وَيُوجَدُ أَيْضًا مَكَانٌ.
23 Then the master said to the servant, ‘Go out into the highways and hedges, and compel them to come in, that my house may be filled.
Ⲩⲟϩ ⲡⲉϫⲉ Ⲡⲟ︦ⲥ︦ ⲙ̀ⲡⲓⲃⲱⲕ ⲛⲁϥ ϫⲉ ⲙⲁϣⲉ ⲛⲁⲕ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ⲉ̀ⲛⲓⲙⲱⲓⲧ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲛⲓⲫ̀ⲣⲁⲅⲙⲟⲥ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁⲣⲓⲁ̀ⲛⲁⲅⲕⲁⲍⲓⲛ ⲉ̀ⲓ̀ ⲉ̀ϧⲟⲩⲛ ϩⲓⲛⲁ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉϥⲙⲟϩ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲁⲏⲓ.
23 فَقَالَ السَّيِّدُ لِلْعَبْدِ: اخْرُجْ إِلَى الطُّرُقِ وَالسِّيَاجَاتِ وَأَلْزِمْهُمْ بِالدُّخُولِ حَتَّى يَمْتَلِئَ بَيْتِي،
24 For I say to you that none of those men who were invited shall taste my supper.’”
Ϯϫⲱ ⲅⲁⲣ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ⲛⲱⲧⲉⲛ ϫⲉ ⲛ̀ⲛⲉ ϩ̀ⲗⲓ ⲛ̀ⲛⲓⲣⲱⲙⲓ ⲉ̀ⲧⲉⲙ̀ⲙⲁⲩ ⲛⲏⲉⲧⲑⲁϩⲉⲙ ϫⲉⲙϯⲡⲓ ⲙ̀ⲡⲁⲇⲓⲡⲛⲟⲛ.
24 لأنِّي أَقُولُ لَكُمْ: إِنَّهُ لَيْسَ وَاحِدٌ مِنْ أُولئِكَ الرِّجَالِ الْمَدْعُوِّينَ يَذُوقُ عَشَائِي ".