Prophecies
النبوآت
	Genesis 27:1-41
(تكوين 27: 1-41)
A reading from the Book of Genesis of Moses the prophet. May his holy blessings be with us. Amen.
Ⲉⲃⲟⲗϧⲉⲛ Ⲡϫⲟⲙ ⲛ̀Ϯⲅⲉⲛⲉⲥⲓⲥ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ Ⲙⲱⲩ̀ⲥⲏⲥ ⲡⲓⲡ̀ⲣⲟⲫⲏⲧⲏⲥ: ⲉ̀ⲣⲉⲡⲉϥⲥ̀ⲙⲟⲩ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ ϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲛⲉⲙⲁⲛ ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ ⲉϥϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ:
من سفر تكوين لموسى النبي بركته المقدسة تكون معنا. آمين.
1 Now it came to pass, when Isaac was old and his eyes were so dim that he could not see, that he called Esau his older son and said to him, “My son.” And he answered him, “Here I am.”
1 وَحَدَثَ لَمَّا شَاخَ إِسْحَاقُ وَكَلَّتْ عَيْنَاهُ عَنِ النَّظَرِ، أَنَّهُ دَعَا عِيسُوَ اِبْنَهُ الْأَكْبَرَ وَقَالَ لَهُ: يَا بُنَيَّ. قَالَ: هَأَنَذَا.
2 Then he said, “Behold now, I am old. I do not know the day of my death.
2 فَقَالَ: هُوَذَا أَنَا قَدْ شِخْتُ وَلَا أَعْلَمُ يَوْمَ مَوْتِي.
3 Now therefore, please take your weapons, your quiver and your bow, and go out to the field and hunt game for me.
3 وَالْآنَ خُذْ عُدَّتَكَ وَجَعْبَتَكَ وَقَوْسَكَ، وَاخْرُجْ إِلَى الصَّحْرَاءِ وَصِدْ لِي صَيْدًا،
4 And make me savory food, such as I love, and bring it to me that I may eat, that my soul may bless you before I die.”
4 وَأَصْلِحْهُ لِي أَلْوَانًا كَمَا أُحِبُّ، وَأْتِنِي بِهِ فَآكُلَ لِكَيْ تُبَارِكَكَ نَفْسِي قَبْلَ أَنْ أَمُوتَ.
5 Now Rebekah was listening when Isaac spoke to Esau his son. And Esau went to the field to hunt game and to bring it.
5 وَكَانَتْ رِفْقَةُ سَامِعَةً حِينَ كَلَّمَ إِسْحَاقُ عِيسُوَ ابْنَهُ. فَمَضَى عِيسُو إِلَى الصَّحْرَاءِ لِيَصِيدَ صَيْدًا وَيَأْتِيَ بِهِ.
6 So Rebekah spoke to Jacob her son, saying, “Indeed I heard your father speak to Esau your brother, saying,
6 فَكَلَّمَتْ رِفْقَةُ يَعْقُوبَ ابْنَهَا قَائِلَةً: إِنِّي قَدْ سَمِعْتُ أَبَاكِ يُكَلِّمُ عِيسُوَ أَخَاكَ قَائِلًا:
7 ‘Bring me game and make savory food for me, that I may eat it and bless you in the presence of the Lord before my death.’
7 اِئْتِنِي بِصَيْدٍ وَأَصْلِحْ لِي أَلْوَانًا فَآكُلَ مِنْهَا وَأُبَارِكَكَ أَمَامَ الرَّبِّ قَبْلَ مَوْتِي.
8 Now therefore, my son, obey my voice according to what I command you.
8 وَالْآنَ يَا بُنَيَّ اسْمَعْ لِقَوْلِي فِي مَا آمُرُكَ بِهِ:
9 Go now to the flock and bring me from there two choice kids of the goats, and I will make savory food from them for your father, such as he loves.
9 اِمْضِ إِلَى الْغَنَمِ وَخُذْ لِي مِنْ ثَمَّ جَدْيَيْنِ مِنَ الْمَعِزِ جَيِّدَيْنِ، فَأُصْلِحَهُمَا أَلْوَانًا لِأَبِيكَ كَمَا يُحِبُّ،
10 Then you shall take it to your father, that he may eat it, and that he may bless you before his death.”
10 فَتُحْضِرَهَا إِلَى أَبِيكَ وَيَأْكُلَ لِكَي يُبَارِكَكَ قَبْلَ مَوْتِهِ.
11 And Jacob said to Rebekah his mother, “Look, Esau my brother is a hairy man, and I am a smooth-skinned man.
11 فَقَالَ يَعْقُوبَ لِرِفْقَةَ أُمِّهِ: إِنَّ عِيسُوَ أَخِي رَجُلٌ أَشْعَرُ وَأَنَا رَجُلٌ أَمْلَسُ.
12 Perhaps my father will feel me, and I shall seem to be a deceiver to him; and I shall bring a curse on myself and not a blessing.”
12 فَلَعَلَّ أَبِي يَجُسُّنِي فَأَكُونَ عِنْدَهُ كَالسَّاخِرِ مِنْهُ، وَأَجْلُبُ عَلَى نَفْسِي لَعْنَةً لَا بَرَكَةً.
13 But his mother said to him, “Let your curse be on me, my son; only obey my voice, and go, get them for me.”
13 فَقَالَتْ لَهُ أُمُّهُ: عَلَيَّ لَعْنَتُكَ يَا بُنَيَّ، إِنَّمَا اسْمَعْ لِقَوْلِيِ وَامْضِ وَخُذْ لِي ذَلِكَ.
14 And he went and got them and brought them to his mother, and his mother made savory food, such as his father loved.
14 فَمَضَى وَأَخَذَ ذَلِكَ وَأَحْضَرَهُ لِأُمِّهِ، فَأَصْلَحَتْهُ أُمُّهُ أَلْوَانًا عَلَى مَا يُحِبُّ أَبُوهُ.
15 Then Rebekah took the choice clothes of her elder son Esau, which were with her in the house, and put them on Jacob her younger son.
15 وَأَخَذَتْ رِفْقَةُ ثِيَابَ عِيسُوَ اِبْنِهَا الْأَكْبَرِ الْفَاخِرَةَ الَّتِي عِنْدَهَا فِي الْبَيْتِ فَأَلْبَسَتْهَا يَعْقُوبَ ابْنَهَا الْأَصْغَرَ.
16 And she put the skins of the kids of the goats on his hands and on the smooth part of his neck.
16 وَكَسَتْ يَدَيْهِ وَمَلَاسَةَ عُنْقِهِ بِجِلْدِ الْمَعِزِ.
17 Then she gave the savory food and the bread, which she had prepared, into the hand of her son Jacob.
17 وَدَفَعَتْ إِلَى يَعْقُوبَ اِبْنِهَا مَا صَنَعَتْهُ مِنَ الْأَلْوَانِ وَالْخُبْزِ.
18 So he went to his father and said, “My father.” And he said, “Here I am. Who are you, my son?”
18 فَدَخَلَ عَلَى أَبِيهِ وَقَالَ: " يَا أَبَتِ "، فَقَالَ: " هَأَنَذَا، مَنْ أَنْتَ يا بُنَيَّ؟ ".
19 Jacob said to his father, “I am Esau your firstborn; I have done just as you told me; please arise, sit and eat of my game, that your soul may bless me.”
19 فَقَالَ يَعْقُوبُ لِأَبِيهِ أَنَا عِيسُو بِكْرُكَ. قَدْ صَنَعْتُ كَمَا أَمَرْتَنِي، قُمْ فَاِجْلِسْ وَكُلْ مِنْ صَيدِي لِكَي تُبَارِكَنِي نَفْسُكَ.
20 But Isaac said to his son, “How is it that you have found it so quickly, my son?” And he said, “Because the Lord your God brought it to me.”
20 فَقَالَ إِسْحَاقُ لِابْنِهِ: مَا أَسْرَعَ مَا أَصَبْتَ يَا بُنَيَّ! فَقَالَ: إِنَّ الرَّبَّ إِلَهَكَ قَدْ يَسَّرَ لِي.
21 Isaac said to Jacob, “Please come near, that I may feel you, my son, whether you are really my son Esau or not.”
21 فَقَالَ إِسْحَاقُ لِيَعْقُوبَ: " تَقَدَّمْ حَتَّى أَجُسَّكَ يَا بُنَيَّ، هَلْ أَنْتَ ابْنِي عِيسُو أَمْ لَا؟ ".
22 So Jacob went near to Isaac his father, and he felt him and said, “The voice is Jacob’s voice, but the hands are the hands of Esau.”
22 فَتَقَدَّمَ يَعْقُوبُ إِلَى إِسْحَاقَ أَبِيهِ، فَجَسَّهُ وَقَالَ: الصَّوْتُ صَوْتُ يَعْقُوبَ، وَلَكِنَّ الْيَدَيْنِ يَدَا عِيسُوَ.
23 And he did not recognize him, because his hands were hairy like his brother Esau’s hands; so he blessed him.
23 وَلَمْ يُثْبِتْهُ لِأَنَّ يَدَيْهِ كَانَتَا مُشْعِرَتَيْنِ كَيَدَي عِيسُوَ أَخِيهِ، فَبَارَكَهُ.
24 Then he said, “Are you really my son Esau?” He said, “I am.”
24 وَقَالَ: " هَلْ أَنْتَ اِبْنَي عِيسُو؟ " قَالَ: " أَنَا هُوَ ".
25 He said, “Bring it near to me, and I will eat of my son’s game, so that my soul may bless you.” So he brought it near to him, and he ate; and he brought him wine, and he drank.
25 فَقَالَ قَدِّمْ لِيْ حَتَّى آكُلَ مِنْ صَيْدِ اِبْنِي لِكَي تُبَارِكَكَ نَفْسِي. فَقَدَّمَ لَهُ فَأَكَلَ، وَأَتَاهُ بِخَمْرٍ فَشَرِبَ.
26 Then his father Isaac said to him, “Come near now and kiss me, my son.”
26 ثُمَّ قَالَ لَهُ إِسْحَاقُ أَبُوهُ: " تَقَدَّمْ قَبِّلْنِي يَا بُنَيَّ ".
27 And he came near and kissed him; and he smelled the smell of his clothing, and blessed him and said: “Surely, the smell of my son Is like the smell of a field Which the Lord has blessed.
27 فَتَقَدَّمَ وَقَبَّلَهُ، فَاشْتَمَّ رَائِحَةَ ثِيَابِهِ وَبَارَكَهُ. وَقَالَ: " هَا هِيَ رَائِحَةُ اِبْنِي كَرَائِحَةِ حَقْلٍ قَدْ بَارَكَهُ الرَّبُّ.
28 Therefore may God give you Of the dew of heaven, Of the fatness of the earth, And plenty of grain and wine.
28 يُعْطِيكَ الرَّبُّ مِنْ نَدَى السَّمَاءِ، وَمِنْ دَسَمِ الْأَرْضِ، وَيُكَثِّرُ لَكَ الْحِنْطَةَ وَالْخَمْرَ.
29 Let peoples serve you, And nations bow down to you. Be master over your brethren, And let your mother’s sons bow down to you. Cursed be everyone who curses you, And blessed be those who bless you!”
29 وَتَخْدِمُكَ الْأُمَمُ، وَتَسْجُدُ لَكَ الْقَبَائِلُ، سَيِّدًا تَكُونُ لإِخْوَتِكَ، وَلَكَ بَنُو أُمِّكَ يَسْجُدُونَ، لَاعِنُكَ مَلْعُونٌ، وَمُبَارِكُكَ مُبَارَكٌ ".
30 Now it happened, as soon as Isaac had finished blessing Jacob, and Jacob had scarcely gone out from the presence of Isaac his father, that Esau his brother came in from his hunting.
30 وَلَمَّا فَرَغَ إِسْحَاقُ مِنْ بَرَكَتِهِ لِيَعْقُوبَ، وَخَرَجَ يَعْقُوبُ مِنْ بَيْنِ يَدَي إِسْحَاقَ أَبِيهِ، إِذَا عِيسُو أَخُوهُ قَدْ أَقْبَلَ مِنْ صَيْدِهِ.
31 He also had made savory food, and brought it to his father, and said to his father, “Let my father arise and eat of his son’s game, that your soul may bless me.”
31 فَصَنَعَ هُوَ أَيْضًا أَلْوَانًا وَأَتَى بِهَا أَبَاهُ وَقَالَ لأَبِيهِ: " لِيَقُمْ أَبِي وَيَأْكُلْ مِنْ صَيْدِ ابْنِهِ لِكَي تُبارِكَنِي نَفْسُكَ ".
32 And his father Isaac said to him, “Who are you?” So he said, “I am your son, your firstborn, Esau.”
32 فَقَالَ لَهُ إِسْحَاقُ أَبُوهُ: " مَنْ أَنْتَ؟ " قَالَ: " أَنَا ابْنُكَ بِكْرُكَ عِيِسُو ".
33 Then Isaac trembled exceedingly, and said, “Who? Where is the one who hunted game and brought it to me? I ate all of it before you came, and I have blessed him—and indeed he shall be blessed.”
33 فَارْتَعَشَ إسْحَاقُ اِرْتِعَاشًا شَدِيدًا جِدًّا، وَقَالَ: " فَمَنْ ذَاكَ الَّذِي صَادَ صَيْدًا فَأَتَانِي بِهِ وَأَكَلْتُ مِنْهُ قَبْلَ أَنْ تَجِيءَ وَبَارَكْتُهُ؟ نَعَمْ، وَمُبَارَكًا يَكُونُ ".
34 When Esau heard the words of his father, he cried with an exceedingly great and bitter cry, and said to his father, “Bless me—me also, O my father!”
34 فَلَمَّا سَمِعَ عِيِسُو كَلَامَ أَبِيهِ صَرَخَ صَرْخَةً عَظِيمَةً وَمُرَّةً جِدًّا، وَقَالَ لِأَبِيهِ: " بَارِكْنِي أَنَا أَيْضًا يَا أَبَتِ ".
35 But he said, “Your brother came with deceit and has taken away your blessing.”
35 فَقَالَ: " قَدْ جَاءَ أَخُوكَ بِمَكْرٍ وَأَخَذَ بَرَكَتَكَ ".
36 And Esau said, “Is he not rightly named Jacob? For he has supplanted me these two times. He took away my birthright, and now look, he has taken away my blessing!” And he said, “Have you not reserved a blessing for me?”
36 فَقَالَ: " أَلأَنَّهُ سُمِّيَ يَعْقُوبَ، قَدْ تَعَقَبَّنِي مَرَّتَيْنِ. أَخَذَ بَكُورِّيَتِي، وَهَا هُوَذَا الْآنَ أَخَذَ بَرَكَتِي. ثُمَّ قَالَ: أَمَا أَبْقَيْتَ لِي بَرَكَةً؟ ".
37 Then Isaac answered and said to Esau, “Indeed I have made him your master, and all his brethren I have given to him as servants; with grain and wine I have sustained him. What shall I do now for you, my son?”
37 فَأَجَابَ إسْحَاقُ وَقَالَ لِعِيسُوَ: " هَأَنَذَا قَدْ جَعَلْتُهُ سَيِّدًا لَكَ، وَدَفَعْتُ إِلَيْهِ جَمِيعَ إِخْوَتِهِ عَبِيدًا وَبِالْحِنْطَةِ وَالْخَمْرِ أَمْدَدْتُهُ، فَمَاذَا أَصْنَعُ لَكَ يَا بُنَيَّ؟ "
38 And Esau said to his father, “Have you only one blessing, my father? Bless me—me also, O my father!” And Esau lifted up his voice and wept.
38 فَقَالَ عِيِسُو لِأَبِيهِ: " أَبَرَكَةً وَاحِدَةً لَكَ يَا أَبَتِ؟ بَارِكْنِي أَنَا أَيْضًا يَا أَبَتِ ". وَرَفَعَ عِيسُو صَوْتَهُ وَبَكَى.
39 Then Isaac his father answered and said to him: “Behold, your dwelling shall be of the fatness of the earth, And of the dew of heaven from above.
39 فَأَجَابَهُ إِسْحَاقُ أَبُوهُ وَقَالَ لَهُ: " بِمَعْزِلٍ عَنْ دَسَمِ الْأَرْضِ يَكُونُ مَسْكِنُكَ، وَعَنْ ظِلِّ السَّمَاءِ مِنَ الْعُلُوِّ،
40 By your sword you shall live, And you shall serve your brother; And it shall come to pass, when you become restless, That you shall break his yoke from your neck.”
40 بِسَيْفِكَ تَعِيشُ، وَأَخَاكَ تَخْدِمُ، وَيَكُونُ أَنَّكَ إِذَا قَوِيْتَ تَكْسِرُ نِيرَهُ عَنْ عُنُقِكَ ".
41 So Esau hated Jacob because of the blessing with which his father blessed him.
41 وَحَقَدَ عِيسُو عَلَى يَعْقُوبَ بِسَبَبِ الْبَرَكَةِ الَّتِي بَارَكَهُ أَبُوهُ بِهَا.
Glory be to the Holy Trinity, our God, forever and unto the ages of all ages. Amen.
Ⲟⲩⲱ̀ⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ϯⲧ̀ⲣⲓⲁⲥ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ Ⲡⲉⲛⲛⲟⲩϯ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛⲉⲙ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲛⲓⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲧⲏⲣⲟⲩ: ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ.
مجداً للثالوث القدوس إلهنا الى أبد الآبدين كلها آمين.
	Isaiah 14:24-32
(اشعياء 14: 24-32)
A reading from Isaiah, the prophet. May his holy blessings be with us. Amen.
Ⲉⲃⲟⲗϧⲉⲛ Ⲏⲥⲁⲏ̀ⲁⲥ ⲡⲓⲡ̀ⲣⲟⲫⲏⲧⲏⲥ: ⲉ̀ⲣⲉⲡⲉϥⲥ̀ⲙⲟⲩ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ ϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲛⲉⲙⲁⲛ ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ ⲉϥϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ:
من اشعياء النبي بركته المقدسة تكون معنا. آمين.
24 The Lord of hosts has sworn, saying, “Surely, as I have thought, so it shall come to pass, And as I have purposed, so it shall stand:
24 إِنَّ رَبَّ الْجُنُودِ قَدْ أَقْسَمَ قَائِلًا: الَّذِي نَوَيْتُهُ هُوَ سَيَكُونُ، وَالَّذِي نَوَيْتُهُ هُوَ سَيَتِمُّ،
25 That I will break the Assyrian in My land, And on My mountains tread him underfoot. Then his yoke shall be removed from them, And his burden removed from their shoulders.
25 إِنِّي سَأُحَطِّمُ أَشُّورَ فِي أَرْضِي وَأَدُوسُهُ عَلَى جِبَالِيِ، فَيُزَالُ عَنْهُمْ نِيرُهُ، وَيُزَاحُ حِمْلُهُ عَنْ أَكْتَافِهِمْ.
26 This is the purpose that is purposed against the whole earth, And this is the hand that is stretched out over all the nations.
26 هَذَا هُوَ القَضَاءُ الَّذِي قَضَيْتُهُ عَلَى كُلِّ الْأَرْضِ، وَهَذِهِ هِيَ الْيَدُ الْمَمْدُودَةُ عَلَى كُلِّ الْأُمَمِ.
27 For the Lord of hosts has purposed, And who will annul it? His hand is stretched out, And who will turn it back?”
27 فَإِنَّ رَبَّ الْجُنُودِ قَدْ قَضَى، فَمَنْ يَنْقُضُ؟ وَيَدُهُ مَمْدُودَةٌ، فَمَنْ يَرُدُّهَا؟
28 This is the burden which came in the year that King Ahaz died.
28 فِي السَّنَةِ الَّتِي مَاتَ فِيهَا الْمَلِكُ آحَازُ كَانَ هَذَا الْوَحْيُ:
29 “Do not rejoice, all you of Philistia, Because the rod that struck you is broken; For out of the serpent’s roots will come forth a viper, And its offspring will be a fiery flying serpent.
29 لَا تَفْرَحِي يَا فِلْسْطِينُ بِأَسْرِهَا، بِأَنَّ قَضِيبَ ضَارِبِكِ قَد اِنْكَسَرَ، فَإِنَّهُ مِنْ أَصْلِ الْحَيَّةِ يَخْرُجُ الْأَرْقَمُ، وَنَسْلُ هَذَا يَكُونُ ثُعْبَانًا مُسِمًّا طَيَّارًا.
30 The firstborn of the poor will feed, And the needy will lie down in safety; I will kill your roots with famine, And it will slay your remnant.
30 وَسَيَرْعَى أَبْكَارَ الْبَائِسِينَ، وَيَرْبِضُ الْمَسَاكِينُ مُطْمَئِنِّيْنَ، فِيمَا أَنَا مُمِيتٌ أَصْلَكِ بِالْجُوعِ، وَبَقِيَّتُكِ تُقْتَلُ.
31 Wail, O gate! Cry, O city! All you of Philistia are dissolved; For smoke will come from the north, And no one will be alone in his appointed times.”
31 وَلْوِلْ أَيُّهَا الْبَابُ. اُصْرُخِي أيَّتهَا الْمَدِينَةُ. قَدْ ذُبْتِ يَا فِلِسطِين بِأَسْرِكِ، لِأَنَّ قَتَامًا وَافِدًا مِنَ الشَّمَالِ، وَلَيْسَ مَنْ يَنْفَرِدُ عَنْ عَصَائِبِهِ.
32 What will they answer the messengers of the nation? That the Lord has founded Zion, And the poor of His people shall take refuge in it.
32 بِمَاذَا تُجَابُ رُسُلُ الْأُمَّةِ؟ إِنَّ الرَّبَّ قَدْ أَسَّسَ صِهْيَوْنَ، وَبِهَا يَعْتَصِمُ بَائِسُو شَعْبِهِ.
Glory be to the Holy Trinity, our God, forever and unto the ages of all ages. Amen.
Ⲟⲩⲱ̀ⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ϯⲧ̀ⲣⲓⲁⲥ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ Ⲡⲉⲛⲛⲟⲩϯ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛⲉⲙ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲛⲓⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲧⲏⲣⲟⲩ: ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ.
مجداً للثالوث القدوس إلهنا الى أبد الآبدين كلها آمين.
	Job 16:1-17:16
(ايوب 16: 1-17: 16)
A reading from Job the righteous. May his holy blessings be with us. Amen.
Ⲉⲃⲟⲗϧⲉⲛ Ⲓⲱⲃ Ⲡⲓⲑ̀ⲙⲏⲓ: ⲉ̀ⲣⲉⲡⲉϥⲥ̀ⲙⲟⲩ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ ϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲛⲉⲙⲁⲛ ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ ⲉϥϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ:
من ايوب الصديق بركته المقدسة تكون معنا. آمين.
1 Then Job answered and said:
1 فَأَجَابَ أَيُّوبُ وَقَالَ:
2 “I have heard many such things; Miserable comforters are you all!
2 كَثِيرًا مَا سَمِعْتُ مِثْلَ هَذَا، إِنَّمَا أَنْتُمْ بِأَجْمَعِكُمْ مُعَزُّونَ مُعَنِّتُونَ.
3 Shall words of wind have an end? Or what provokes you that you answer?
3 وَأَنْتَ مَتَى يَنْتَهِي كَلَامُكَ الْفَارِغُ، وَمَا الَّذِي يُغْرِيكَ بِمُجَاوَبَتِي؟
4 I also could speak as you do, If your soul were in my soul’s place. I could heap up words against you, And shake my head at you;
4 لَقَدْ كَانَ لِي أَنْ أُخَاطِبَكُمْ كَمَا تُخَاطِبُونَنِي، لَوْ كَانَتْ أَنْفُسُكُمْ فِي مَوْضِعِ نَفْسِي، وَلَلَفَّقَتُ لَكُمْ أَقْوَالًا وَأَنْفَضْتُ إِلَيْكُمْ رَأْسِي
5 But I would strengthen you with my mouth, And the comfort of my lips would relieve your grief.
5 وَلَشَجَّعْتُكُمْ بِكَلَامِ فَمِيِ، وَرَفَقْتُ بِكُمْ تَعْزِيَةَ شَفَتَيَّ.
6 “Though I speak, my grief is not relieved; And if I remain silent, how am I eased?
6 إِذَا نَطَقْتُ لَمْ يَسْكُنْ وَجَعِي، أَوْ صَمَتُّ لَمْ يَبْرَحْنِي.
7 But now He has worn me out; You have made desolate all my company.
7 لَقَدْ جَهَدَنِي الْيَوْمَ، قَدْ دَمَّرْتَ جَمَاعَتِي بِأَسْرِهَا يَا أَللَّهُ
8 You have shriveled me up, And it is a witness against me; My leanness rises up against me And bears witness to my face.
8 وَبَيْنَمَا أَنْتَ مُقَيِّدِي إذَا بِشَاهِدٍ بِصَاحِبِ زُورٍ قَدْ قَامَ فَقَرَفَنِي فِي وَجْهِي.
9 He tears me in His wrath, and hates me; He gnashes at me with His teeth; My adversary sharpens His gaze on me.
9 مَزَّقَنِي حَنَقًا وَخَتَلَنِي. صَرَفَ عَلَيَّ بِأَسْنَانِهِ. وَعَدُّوي حَدَّدَ عَيْنَيْهِ عَلَيَّ.
10 They gape at me with their mouth, They strike me reproachfully on the cheek, They gather together against me.
10 فَغَرُوا عَلَيَّ أَفْوَاهَهُمْ. وَلَطَمُوا خَدَّيَ تَعْيِيرًا. وَتَمَالَأُوا عَلَيَّ جُمْلَةً.
11 God has delivered me to the ungodly, And turned me over to the hands of the wicked.
11 دَفَعَنِي اللَّهُ إِلَى الْجَائِرِ، وَبَيْنَ أَيْدِي الْمُنَافِقِينَ أَلْقَانِي.
12 I was at ease, but He has shattered me; He also has taken me by my neck, and shaken me to pieces; He has set me up for His target,
12 كُنْتُ فِي دَعَةٍ فَهَشَّمَنِي. أَخَذَ بِقَفَايَ فَحَطَّمَنِي، وَنَصَبَنِي هَدَفًا لَهُ.
13 His archers surround me. He pierces my heart and does not pity; He pours out my gall on the ground.
13 تَكْتَنِفُنِي سِهَامُهُ. يَشُقُّ بِهَا كُلْيَتَيَّ وَلَا يُشْفِقُ. وَيُرِيقُ مَرَارَتِي عَلَى الْأَرْضِ.
14 He breaks me with wound upon wound; He runs at me like a warrior.
14 يُثْخِنُنِي جِرَاحَةً عَلَى جِرَاحَةٍ. وَيَهْجُمُ عَلَيَّ هُجُومَ الْجَبَّارِ.
15 “I have sewn sackcloth over my skin, And laid my head in the dust.
15 لَقْدَ لَفَّقْتُ عَلَى جِلْدِي مِسْحًا، وَمَرَّغْتُ فِي التُّرَابِ قَرْنِي.
16 My face is flushed from weeping, And on my eyelids is the shadow of death;
16 كَوَى الْبُكَاءُ خَدَيَّ، وَغَشِيَتْ جَفْنَيَّ ظِلَالُ الْمَوْتِ.
17 Although no violence is in my hands, And my prayer is pure.
17 عَلَى أَنَّ يَدَيَّ لَا جَوْرَ فِيهِمَا، وَعِبَادَتِي زَكِيِّةٌ.
18 “O earth, do not cover my blood, And let my cry have no resting place!
18 أَيَّتُهَا الْأَرْضُ لَا تَسْتُرِي دَمِي، وَلَا يَكُنْ لِصُرَاخِيِ قَرَارٌ.
19 Surely even now my witness is in heaven, And my evidence is on high.
19 إِنَّ فِي هَذِهِ السَّاعَةِ نَفْسِهَا لِي شَاهِدًا فِي السَّمَاءِ، وَمُحَاكِمًا عَنِّي فِي الْأَعَالِي.
20 My friends scorn me; My eyes pour out tears to God.
20 إِنَّ السَّاخِرِينَ مِنِّي هُمْ أَخِلَّائِيِ. وَلَكِنْ إِلَى اللَّهِ تَفِيضُ عَيْنَايَ.
21 Oh, that one might plead for a man with God, As a man pleads for his neighbor!
21 فَلْيَنْتَصِفْ لِرَجُلٍ أَمْرُهُ إِلَى اللَّهِ وَلِابْنِ بَشَرٍ مِنْ خَلِيلِهِ.
22 For when a few years are finished, I shall go the way of no return.
22 فَإِنَّ سَنَوَاتِيَ الْمَعْدُودَةَ تَنْقَضِي فَأَرْكَبُ طَرِيقًا لَا أَعُودُ مِنْهُ.
1 “My spirit is broken, My days are extinguished, The grave is ready for me.
1 قَدِ اِضْمَحَلَّتْ رُوحِي. وَاِنْطَفَأَتْ أَيَّامِي. وَإِنَّمَا لِيَ الْقُبُورُ.
2 Are not mockers with me? And does not my eye dwell on their provocation?
2 لَا كَانَ عِنْدِي أُولَئِكَ الْهَازِئُونَ، الَّذِينَ تَسْهَرُ عَينِي عَلَى عَدَاوَاتِهِمْ.
3 “Now put down a pledge for me with Yourself. Who is he who will shake hands with me?
3 هَاتِ كَفِيلًا لِي لَدَيْكَ أَيُّهَا الْإِلَهُ. مَنِ الَّذِي يُصَفِّقُ عَلَى يَدِي؟
4 For You have hidden their heart from understanding; Therefore You will not exalt them.
4 فَإِنَّكَ قَدْ حَجَبْتَ قُلُوبَهُمْ عَنِ الْفِطْنَةِ، لِذَلِكَ لَا تُعَزِّهِمْ.
5 He who speaks flattery to his friends, Even the eyes of his children will fail.
5 الَّذِي أَسْلَمَ الْأَخِلَّاءَ لِلسَّلْبِ، فَلْتُرْمَ أَعْيُنُ بَنِيهِ بِالْكِلَالِ.
6 “But He has made me a byword of the people, And I have become one in whose face men spit.
6 الَّذِي نَصَبَنِي لِلشُّعُوبِ مَثَلًا. وَعَرَّضَ وَجْهِي لِلْبَاصِقِينَ
7 My eye has also grown dim because of sorrow, And all my members are like shadows.
7 حَتَّى كَلَّ طَرْفِي مِنَ الْكَآبَةِ، وَصَارَ كَيَانِي بِجُمْلَتِهِ ظِلًّا.
8 Upright men are astonished at this, And the innocent stirs himself up against the hypocrite.
8 حِينَئِذٍ يَدْهَشُ الْمُسْتَقِيمُونَ عَجَبًا، وَيَنْهَضُ الزَّكِيُّ عَلَى الْمُنَافِقِ،
9 Yet the righteous will hold to his way, And he who has clean hands will be stronger and stronger.
9 وَيَلْزَمُ الصِّدِّيقُ طَرِيقَهُ، وَيَزْدَادُ النَّقِيُّ الْيَدَيْنِ قُوَّةً.
10 “But please, come back again, all of you, For I shall not find one wise man among you.
10 أَمَّا أَنْتُمْ فَارْجِعُوا، تَعَالَوْا بِأَجْمَعِكُمْ أَفَلَا أَجِدُ فِيكُمْ حَكِيمًا؟!
11 My days are past, My purposes are broken off, Even the thoughts of my heart.
11 أَيَّامِي قَدِ اِنْقَضَتْ. وَتَقَطَّعَتْ مَآرِبِي الَّتِي هِيَ حَظُّ قَلْبِي.
12 They change the night into day; ‘The light is near,’ they say, in the face of darkness.
12 جُعِلَ لَيْلِي نَهَارًا، وَنُورِي يَكَادُ يَكُونُ ظَلَامًا.
13 If I wait for the grave as my house, If I make my bed in the darkness,
13 مَا رَجَائِيِ؟ إِنَّمَا الْهَاوِيَةُ بَيْتِي، وَفِي الظَّلَامِ مَهَّدْتُ مَضْجَعِي.
14 If I say to corruption, ‘You are my father,’ And to the worm, ‘You are my mother and my sister,’
14 قُلْتُ لِلْفَسَادِ: أَنْتَ أَبِي، وَلِلدِّيدَانِ: أَنْتِ أُمِّي وَأُخْتِي.
15 Where then is my hope? As for my hope, who can see it?
15 إِذًا أَيْنَ رَجَائِيِ؟ رَجَائِي مَنْ يَرَاهُ؟
16 Will they go down to the gates of Sheol? Shall we have rest together in the dust?”
16 إِنَّهُ يَهْبِطُ إِلَى أَبْوابِ الْجَحِيمِ. لَا جُرْمَ، إِنَّ فِي التُّرَابِ لَرَاحَةً.
Glory be to the Holy Trinity, our God, forever and unto the ages of all ages. Amen.
Ⲟⲩⲱ̀ⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ϯⲧ̀ⲣⲓⲁⲥ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ Ⲡⲉⲛⲛⲟⲩϯ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛⲉⲙ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲛⲓⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲧⲏⲣⲟⲩ: ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ.
مجداً للثالوث القدوس إلهنا الى أبد الآبدين كلها آمين.