Stand in the fear of God and listen to the Holy Gospel. A reading from the Gospel according to our teacher Saint Matthew the Evangelist, and the pure disciple. May his blessings be with us all.
قِفُوا بِخَوْفِ اللهِ، وَأَنْصِتُوا لِسَمَاعِ الإِنْجِيلِ الْمُقَدَّسِ. فَصْلٌ مِنْ بِشَارَةِ الإِنْجِيلِ لِمُعَلِّمِنَا مَارْ متى الْبَشِيرِ، التِّلْمِيذِ الطَّاهِرِ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
From the Psalms of our teacher David the prophet. May his blessings be with us all.
مِنْ مَزَامِيرِ تَرَاتِيلِ مُعَلِّمِنَا دَاوُدَ النَّبِيِّ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
Matins Psalm
المزمور
	Psalms 71:9,18
(مزامير 71: 9,18)
Yes, all kings shall fall down before Him; All nations shall serve Him. And let the whole earth be filled with His glory. Amen and Amen.
Ⲉⲩⲉ̀ⲟⲩⲱϣⲧ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟϥ ⲧⲏⲣⲟⲩ: ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲛⲓⲟⲩⲣⲱⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲡ̀ⲕⲁϩⲓ: ⲛⲓⲉⲑⲛⲟⲥ ⲧⲏⲣⲟⲩ ⲉⲩⲉ̀ⲉⲣⲃⲱⲕ ⲛⲁϥ: ⲉϥⲉ̀ⲙⲟϩ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲡ̀ⲕⲁϩⲓ ⲧⲏⲣϥ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗϧⲉⲛ ⲡⲉϥⲱ̀ⲟⲩ. ⲁ︦ⲗ︦.
وَيَسْجُدُ لَهُ جَمِيعُ مُلُوكِ الأَرْضِ، وَكُلُّ الأُمَمِ تَتَعَبَّدُ لَهُ. وَتَمْتَلِئُ الأَرْضُ كُلُّهَا مِنْ مَجْدِهِ. هللويا.
People:
Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
الليلويا.
	Psalm Trailer for the Pope or a Bishop
(Ⲙⲁⲣⲟⲩϭⲁⲥϥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲧ̀ⲉⲕⲕ̀ⲗⲏⲥⲓⲁ̀...)
People:
Amen Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲙⲏⲛ Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
امين الليلويا.
Then the introduction to the Gospel is read.
ثم تقال مقدمة الأنجيل وهي:
Reader:
Blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord. Our Lord, God, Savior and King of us all, Jesus Christ, Son of the living God to whom is glory forever. Amen.
القارﺉُ:
مباركٌ الآتي باسمِ الربِّ إلهِ القواتِ، ربُّنا وإلهُنا ومخلصُنا وملكُنا كلِّنا، يسوعُ المسيحُ، ابنُ اللهِ الحيِّ، الذي لهُ المجدُ إلى الأبدِ. آمين.
Matins Gospel
الإنجيل
	Matthew 22:41-46
(متى 22: 41-46)
41 While the Pharisees were gathered together, Jesus asked them,
Ⲉ̀ⲧⲁⲩⲑⲱⲟⲩϯ ⲇⲉ ⲉⲩⲙⲁ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲛⲓⲪⲁⲣⲓⲥⲉⲟⲥ ⲁϥϣⲉⲛⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ Ⲓⲏ︦ⲥ︦.
41 وَفِيمَا كَانَ الْفَرِّيسِيُّونَ مُجْتَمَعِينَ مَعًا سَأَلَهُمْ يَسُوعُ
42 saying, “What do you think about the Christ? Whose Son is He?” They said to Him, “The Son of David.”
Ⲉϥϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ϫⲉ ⲟⲩ ⲡⲉ ⲉ̀ⲧⲉⲛⲙⲉⲩⲓ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟϥ ⲉⲑⲃⲉ Ⲡⲭ︦ⲥ︦ ϫⲉ Ⲡ̀ϣⲏⲣⲓ ⲛ̀ⲛⲓⲙ ⲡⲉ ⲡⲉϫⲱⲟⲩ ⲛⲁϥ ϫⲉ Ⲡ̀ϣⲏⲣⲓ ⲛ̀Ⲇⲁⲩⲓⲇ ⲡⲉ.
42 قَائِلًا: " مَاذَا تَظُنُّونَ فِي الْمَسِيحِ؟ اِبْنُ مَنْ هُوَ؟ " قَالُوا لَهُ: " اِبْنُ دَاوُدَ ".
43 He said to them, “How then does David in the Spirit call Him ‘Lord,’ saying:
Ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ⲛⲱⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ Ⲓⲏ︦ⲥ︦ ϫⲉ ⲡⲱⲥ ⲟⲩⲛ Ⲇⲁⲩⲓⲇ ϧⲉⲛ ⲡⲓⲡ̀ⲛ︦ⲁ︦ ϥ̀ⲙⲟⲩϯ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟϥ ϫⲉ Ⲡⲁⲟ︦ⲥ︦ ⲉϥϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ.
43 قَالَ لَهُمْ يَسُوعُ: " فَكَيْفَ يَدْعُوهُ دَاوُدُ بِالرُّوحِ رَبِّي قَائِلًا:
44 ‘The Lord said to my Lord, “Sit at My right hand, Till I make Your enemies Your footstool”’?
Ϫⲉ ⲡⲉϫⲉ Ⲡⲟ︦ⲥ︦ ⲙ̀Ⲡⲁⲟ︦ⲥ︦︦ ϫⲉ ϩⲉⲙⲥⲓ ⲥⲁⲧⲟⲩⲓⲛⲁⲙ ϣⲁϯⲭⲱ ⲛ̀ⲛⲉⲕϫⲁϫⲓ ⲥⲁⲡⲉⲥⲏⲧ ⲛ̀ⲛⲉⲕϭⲁⲗⲁⲩϫ.
44 قَالَ الرَّبُّ لِرَبِّي: اِجْلِسْ عَنْ يَمِينِي حَتَّى أَضَعَ أَعْدَاءَكَ تَحْتَ قَدَمَيْكَ.
45 If David then calls Him ‘Lord,’ how is He his Son?”
Ⲓⲥϫⲉ ⲟⲩⲛ Ⲇⲁⲩⲓⲇ ϧⲉⲛ ⲡⲓⲡ̀ⲛⲉⲩⲙⲁ ϥ̀ⲙⲟⲩϯ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟϥ ϫⲉ Ⲡⲁⲟ︦ⲥ︦ ⲡⲱⲥ ⲡⲉϥϣⲏⲣⲓ ⲡⲉ.
45 فَإِنْ كَانَ دَاوُدُ بِالرُّوحِ يَدْعُوهُ رَبِّي، فَكَيْفَ يَكُونُ ابْنَهُ؟ "
46 And no one was able to answer Him a word, nor from that day on did anyone dare question Him anymore.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉ ϩ̀ⲗⲓ ϣ̀ϫⲉⲙϫⲟⲙ ⲛ̀ⲉ̀ⲣⲟⲩⲱ̀ ⲛⲁϥ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩⲥⲁϫⲓ ⲟⲩⲇⲉ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉ ϩ̀ⲗⲓ ϣ̀ⲉⲣⲧⲟⲗⲙⲁⲛ ⲉ̀ϣⲉⲛϥ ⲓⲥϫⲉⲛ ⲡⲓⲉ̀ϩⲟⲟⲩ ⲉ̀ⲧⲉⲙ̀ⲙⲁⲩ
46 فَلَمْ يَسْتَطِعْ أَحَدٌ أَنْ يُجِيبَهُ بِكَلِمَةٍ. وَلَمْ يَجْسُرْ أَحَدٌ مِنْ ذلِكَ الْيَوْمِ أَنْ يَسْأَلَهُ أَلْبَتَّةَ.