Stand in the fear of God and listen to the Holy Gospel. A reading from the Gospel according to our teacher Saint Luke the Evangelist, and the pure disciple. May his blessings be with us all.
قِفُوا بِخَوْفِ اللهِ، وَأَنْصِتُوا لِسَمَاعِ الإِنْجِيلِ الْمُقَدَّسِ. فَصْلٌ مِنْ بِشَارَةِ الإِنْجِيلِ لِمُعَلِّمِنَا مَارْ لوقا الْبَشِيرِ، التِّلْمِيذِ الطَّاهِرِ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
From the Psalms of our teacher David the prophet. May his blessings be with us all.
مِنْ مَزَامِيرِ تَرَاتِيلِ مُعَلِّمِنَا دَاوُدَ النَّبِيِّ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
Liturgy Psalm
المزمور
	Psalms 142:6,7
(مزامير 142: 6,7)
I spread out my hands to You; My soul longs for You like a thirsty land. Answer me speedily, O Lord; My spirit fails!
Ⲁⲓⲫⲱⲣϣ ⲛ̀ⲛⲁϫⲓϫ ⲉ̀ⲡ̀ϣⲱⲓ ϩⲁⲣⲟⲕ: ⲁ̀ ⲧⲁⲯⲩⲭⲏ ⲉⲣ ⲙ̀ⲫ̀ⲣⲏϯ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩⲕⲁϩⲓ ⲛ̀ⲁⲑⲙⲱⲟⲩ ⲛⲁⲕ. Ⲥⲱⲧⲉⲙ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟⲓ ⲛ̀ⲭⲱⲗⲉⲙ Ⲡ̀ⲟ︦ⲥ︦: ϫⲉ ⲁϥⲙⲟⲩⲛⲕ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲡⲁⲡ︦ⲛ︦ⲁ︦. Ⲁ︦ⲗ︦.
بَسَطْتُ يَدَيَّ إِلَيْكَ. صَارَتْ لَكَ نَفْسِي مِثْلَ أَرْضٍ عَدِيمَةِ الْمَاءِ. اِسْتَجِبْ لِي يَا رَبُّ عَاجِلًا، فَقَدْ فَنِيَتْ رُوحِي. هَلِّلُويَا.
People:
Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
الليلويا.
	Psalm Trailer for the Pope or a Bishop
(Ⲙⲁⲣⲟⲩϭⲁⲥϥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲧ̀ⲉⲕⲕ̀ⲗⲏⲥⲓⲁ̀...)
People:
Amen Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲙⲏⲛ Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
امين الليلويا.
Then the introduction to the Gospel is read.
ثم تقال مقدمة الأنجيل وهي:
Reader:
Blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord. Our Lord, God, Savior and King of us all, Jesus Christ, Son of the living God to whom is glory forever. Amen.
القارﺉُ:
مباركٌ الآتي باسمِ الربِّ إلهِ القواتِ، ربُّنا وإلهُنا ومخلصُنا وملكُنا كلِّنا، يسوعُ المسيحُ، ابنُ اللهِ الحيِّ، الذي لهُ المجدُ إلى الأبدِ. آمين.
Liturgy Gospel
الإنجيل
	Luke 9:12-17
(لوقا 9: 12-17)
12 When the day began to wear away, the twelve came and said to Him, “Send the multitude away, that they may go into the surrounding towns and country, and lodge and get provisions; for we are in a deserted place here.”
Ⲡⲓⲉ̀ϩⲟⲟⲩ ⲇⲉ ⲛⲁϥⲉⲣϩⲏⲧⲥ ⲛ̀ⲣⲓⲕⲓ ⲡⲉ ⲉⲧⲁϥⲓ̀ ⲇⲉ ϩⲁⲣⲟϥ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲡⲓⲓ︦ⲃ︦ ⲉϫⲱⲟⲩ ⲛⲁϥ ϫⲉ ⲭⲁ ⲛⲓⲙⲏϣ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ϩⲓⲛⲁ ⲛ̀ⲧⲟⲩϣⲉ ⲛⲱⲟⲩ ⲉ̀ⲛⲓϯⲙⲓ ⲉⲧⲉ ⲙ̀ⲡ̀ⲕⲱϯ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲛⲓⲓⲟϩⲓ ⲛ̀ⲧⲟⲩⲙ̀ⲧⲟⲛ ⲙ̀ⲙⲱⲟⲩ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲟⲩϫⲉⲙ ⲫⲏ ⲧⲟⲩⲛⲁⲟⲩⲟⲙϥ ϫⲉ ⲧⲉⲛⲭⲏ ⲙ̀ⲡⲁⲓⲙⲁ ϧⲉⲛ ⲟⲩⲙⲁ ⲛ̀ϣⲁϥⲉ.
12 وَكَانَ النَّهَارُ قَدْ بَدأَ يَمِيلُ. فَتَقَدَّمَ إلَيْهِ الاِثْنَا عَشَرَ وَقَالُوا لَهُ: " اِصْرِفِ الْجُمُوعَ لِيَذْهَبُوا إِلَى الْقُرَى الْمُحِيطَةِ وَالْحُقُولِ لِيَسْتَرِيحُوا وَيَجِدُوا مَا يَأْكُلُونَهُ، فإِنَّنَا هَهُنَا فِي مَوْضِعٍ قَفْرٍ ".
13 But He said to them, “You give them something to eat.” And they said, “We have no more than five loaves and two fish, unless we go and buy food for all these people.”
Ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ⲇⲉ ⲛⲱⲟⲩ ϫⲉ ⲙⲟⲓ ⲛⲱⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ⲑⲱⲧⲉⲛ ⲉⲑⲣⲟⲩⲟⲩⲱⲙ ⲛ̀ⲑⲱⲟⲩ ⲇⲉ ⲉϫⲱⲟⲩ ϫⲉ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲛ ϩⲟⲩⲟ̀ ⲉ̀ⲉ︦ ⲛ̀ⲱⲓⲕ ⲛ̀ⲧⲟⲧⲉⲛ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲉⲃⲧ ⲃ︦ ⲉ̀ⲃⲏⲗ ⲁ̀ⲛⲟⲛ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉⲛϣⲉ ⲛⲁⲛ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉⲛϣⲱⲡ ⲛ̀ϩⲁⲛϧ̀ⲣⲏⲟⲩⲓ̀ ⲙ̀ⲡⲁⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ ⲧⲏⲣϥ.
13 فَقَالَ لَهُمْ: " أَعْطُوهُمْ أَنْتُمْ لِيَأْكُلُوا ". فَقَالُوا: " لَيْسَ عِنْدَنَا أَكْثَرُ مِنْ خَمْسِ خُبْزَاتٍ وَسَمَكَتَيْنِ، إِلَّا أَنْ نَمْضِيَ نَحْنُ فَنَشْتَرِيَ أَطْعِمَةً لِهَذَا الشَّعْبِ جَمِيعِهِ ".
14 For there were about five thousand men. Then He said to His disciples, “Make them sit down in groups of fifty.”
Ⲁⲩⲟⲓ ⲇⲉ ⲛⲁⲩ ⲉ︦ ⲛ̀ϣⲟ ⲛ̀ⲣⲱⲙⲓ ⲁϥϫⲟⲥ ⲇⲉ ⲛ̀ⲛⲉϥⲙⲁⲑⲏⲧⲏⲥ ϫⲉ ⲙⲁⲣⲟⲩⲣⲱⲧⲉⲃ ⲕⲁⲧⲁ ⲙⲁ ⲛ̀ϩⲁⲛⲛ︦ ⲉ̀ⲫ̀ⲙⲁ.
14 وَكَانُوا نَحْوَ خَمْسَةِ آلَافِ رَجُلٍ. فَقَالَ لِتَلَامِيذِهِ: " لِيَتَّكِئوا فِي كُلِّ مَوضِعٍ خَمْسِينَ خَمْسِينَ ".
15 And they did so, and made them all sit down.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁⲩⲓ̀ⲣⲓ ⲙ̀ⲡⲁⲓⲣⲏϯ ϥⲑ̀ⲣⲟⲩⲣⲱⲧⲉⲃ ⲧⲏⲣⲟⲩ.
15 فَفَعَلُوا هَكَذَا، وَأَتْكَأُوهُمْ أَجْمَعِينَ.
16 Then He took the five loaves and the two fish, and looking up to heaven, He blessed and broke them, and gave them to the disciples to set before the multitude.
Ⲉⲧⲁϥϭⲓ ⲇⲉ ⲙ̀ⲡⲓⲉ︦ ⲛ̀ⲱⲓⲕ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲡⲓⲧⲉⲃⲧ ⲃ︦ ⲉⲧⲁϥⲥⲟⲙⲥ ⲉ̀ϩ̀ⲣⲏⲓ ⲉ̀ⲧ̀ⲫⲉ ⲁϥⲥ̀ⲙⲟⲩ ⲉ̀ⲣⲱⲟⲩ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁϥⲫⲁϣⲟⲩ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ϥϯ ⲛ̀ⲛⲓⲙⲁⲑⲏⲧⲏⲥ ⲉⲑⲣⲟⲩⲭⲱ ϧⲁⲣⲱⲟⲩ ⲙ̀ⲡⲓⲙⲏϣ.
16 وَأَخَذَ الْخَمْسَ الْخُبْزَاتِ وَالسَّمَكَتَيْنِ، وَنَظَرَ إِلَى السَّمَاءِ وَبَارَكَهَا، وقَسَّمَهَا وَأَعْطَى التَّلَامِيذَ لِيَضَعُوا أَمَامَ الْجُمُوعِ.
17 So they all ate and were filled, and twelve baskets of the leftover fragments were taken up by them.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁⲩⲟⲩⲱⲙ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁⲩⲥⲓ ⲧⲏⲣⲟⲩ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁⲩⲱⲗⲓ ⲙ̀ⲫⲏⲉⲧⲁϥⲉⲣϩⲟⲩⲟ̀ ⲉ̀ⲣⲱⲟⲩ ︦ⲃ︦ ⲛ̀ⲕⲟⲧ ⲛ̀ⲗⲁⲕϩ ⲉⲩⲙⲟϩ.
17 فَأَكَلُوا جَمِيعُهُمْ وَشبِعُوا. ثُمَّ رَفَعُوا مَا فَضَلَ عَنْهُمُ اثْنَتَيْ عَشْرَةَ قُفَّةً مَمْلُوءَةً.