Stand in the fear of God and listen to the Holy Gospel. A reading from the Gospel according to our teacher Saint Matthew the Evangelist, and the pure disciple. May his blessings be with us all.
قِفُوا بِخَوْفِ اللهِ، وَأَنْصِتُوا لِسَمَاعِ الإِنْجِيلِ الْمُقَدَّسِ. فَصْلٌ مِنْ بِشَارَةِ الإِنْجِيلِ لِمُعَلِّمِنَا مَارْ متى الْبَشِيرِ، التِّلْمِيذِ الطَّاهِرِ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
From the Psalms of our teacher David the prophet. May his blessings be with us all.
مِنْ مَزَامِيرِ تَرَاتِيلِ مُعَلِّمِنَا دَاوُدَ النَّبِيِّ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
Vespers Psalm
المزمور
	Psalms 92:2
(مزامير 92: 2)
The floods have lifted up, O Lord, The floods have lifted up their voice; The floods lift up their waves. The Lord on high is mightier Than the noise of many waters.
Ⲁⲩⲧⲱⲟⲩⲛⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ϩⲁⲛⲓⲁⲣⲱⲟⲩ Ⲡ̀ⲟ︦ⲥ︦: ⲁⲩϭⲓⲥⲓ ⲛ̀ⲧⲟⲩⲥ̀ⲙⲏ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ϩⲁⲛⲓⲁⲣⲱⲟⲩ: ϩⲁⲛⲓⲁⲣⲱⲟⲩ ⲉⲩⲉ̀ϭⲓⲥⲓ ⲛ̀ⲧⲟⲩⲥ̀ⲙⲏ: ⲉ̀ⲃⲟ ϩⲁ ⲧ̀ⲥ̀ⲙⲏ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ϩⲁⲛⲙⲱⲟⲩ ⲉⲩⲟϣ. Ⲁ︦ⲗ︦.
رَفَعَتِ الْأَنهَارُ يَا رَبُّ، رَفَعَتِ الْأَنْهَارُ صَوْتَهَا. تَرْفَعُ الْأَنْهَارُ صَوْتَهَا، مِنْ صَوْتِ مِيَاهٍ كَثِيرَةٍ. هَلِّلُويَا.
People:
Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
الليلويا.
	Psalm Trailer for the Pope or a Bishop
(Ⲙⲁⲣⲟⲩϭⲁⲥϥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲧ̀ⲉⲕⲕ̀ⲗⲏⲥⲓⲁ̀...)
People:
Amen Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲙⲏⲛ Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
امين الليلويا.
Then the introduction to the Gospel is read.
ثم تقال مقدمة الأنجيل وهي:
Reader:
Blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord. Our Lord, God, Savior and King of us all, Jesus Christ, Son of the living God to whom is glory forever. Amen.
القارﺉُ:
مباركٌ الآتي باسمِ الربِّ إلهِ القواتِ، ربُّنا وإلهُنا ومخلصُنا وملكُنا كلِّنا، يسوعُ المسيحُ، ابنُ اللهِ الحيِّ، الذي لهُ المجدُ إلى الأبدِ. آمين.
Vespers Gospel
الإنجيل
	Matthew 14:15-21
(متى 14: 15-21)
15 When it was evening, His disciples came to Him, saying, “This is a deserted place, and the hour is already late. Send the multitudes away, that they may go into the villages and buy themselves food.”
Ⲉ̀ⲧⲁ ⲣⲟⲩϩⲓ ⲇⲉ ϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲁⲩⲓ̀ ϩⲁⲣⲟϥ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲛⲉϥⲙⲁⲑⲏⲧⲏⲥ ⲉⲩϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ϫⲉ ⲡⲓⲙⲁ ⲟⲩϣⲁϥⲉ ⲡⲉ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲡⲓⲛⲁⲩ ⲁϥⲥⲓⲛⲓ ⲭⲁ ⲛⲓⲙⲏϣ ⲟⲩⲛ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ϩⲓⲛⲁ ⲛ̀ⲥⲉϣⲉⲛⲱⲟⲩ ⲉ̀ⲛⲓϯⲙⲓ ⲛ̀ⲥⲉϣⲱⲡ ⲛ̀ϩⲁⲛϧ̀ⲣⲏⲟⲩⲓ̀ ⲛⲱⲟⲩ.
15 وَلَمَّا كَانَ الْمَسَاءُ جَاءَ إِلَيْهِ تَلَامِيذُهُ قَائِلِينَ: " إِنَّ الْمَوْضِعَ قَفْرٌ وَالْوَقْتَ قَدْ عَبَرَ. فَاصْرِفِ الجْمَعَ إِذًا لِكَيْ يَذْهَبُوا إِلَى القُرَى وَيَبْتَاعُوا لَهُمْ طَعَامًا ".
16 But Jesus said to them, “They do not need to go away. You give them something to eat.”
Ⲛ̀ⲑⲟϥ ⲇⲉ ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ⲛⲱⲟⲩ ϫⲉ ⲥⲉⲉⲣⲭ̀ⲣⲓⲁ̀ ⲁⲛ ⲛ̀ⲧⲟⲩϣⲉⲛⲱⲟⲩ ⲙⲟⲓ ⲛⲱⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ⲑⲱⲧⲉⲛ ⲙⲁⲣⲟⲩⲟⲩⲱⲙ.
16 أَمَّا هُوَ فَقَالَ لَهُمْ: " لَا حَاجَةَ لَهُمْ أَنْ يَمْضُوا. أَعْطُوهُمْ أَنْتُمْ لِيَأْكُلُوا ".
17 And they said to Him, “We have here only five loaves and two fish.”
Ⲛ̀ⲑⲱⲟⲩ ⲇⲉ ⲡⲉϫⲱⲟⲩ ⲛⲁϥ ϫⲉ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲛ ⲛ̀ⲧⲁⲛ ⲙ̀ⲡⲁⲓⲙⲁ ⲉ̀ⲃⲏⲗ ⲉ̀ⲉ︦ ⲛ̀ⲱⲓⲕ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲧⲉⲃⲧ ⲃ︦.
17 أَمَّا هُمْ فَقَالُوا لَهُ: " لَيْسَ عِنْدَنَا هَهُنَا إِلَّا خَمْسَةُ أَرْغِفَةٍ وَسَمَكَتَانِ ".
18 He said, “Bring them here to Me.”
Ⲛ̀ⲑⲟϥ ⲇⲉ ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ⲛⲱⲟⲩ ϫⲉ ⲁ̀ⲛⲓⲧⲟⲩ ⲛⲏⲓ ⲙ̀ⲛⲁⲓ.
18 فَقَالَ لَهُمْ: " اِيتُونِي بِهَا إِلَى هُنَا ".
19 Then He commanded the multitudes to sit down on the grass. And He took the five loaves and the two fish, and looking up to heaven, He blessed and broke and gave the loaves to the disciples; and the disciples gave to the multitudes.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁϥⲟⲩⲁϩⲥⲁϩⲛⲓ ⲉⲑⲣⲉ ⲛⲓⲙⲏϣ ⲣⲱⲧⲉⲃ ϩⲓϫⲉⲛ ⲡⲓⲥⲓⲙ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉ̀ⲧⲁϥϭⲓ ⲙ̀ⲡⲓⲉ︦ ⲛ̀ⲱⲓⲕ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲡⲓⲧⲉⲃⲧ ⲃ︦ ⲁϥϫⲟⲩϣⲧ ⲉ̀ⲡ̀ϣⲱⲓ ⲉ̀ⲧ̀ⲫⲉ ⲁϥⲥ̀ⲙⲟⲩ ⲉ̀ⲣⲱⲟⲩ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁϥⲫⲁϣⲟⲩ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁϥϯ ⲛ̀ⲛⲓⲱⲓⲕ ⲛ̀ⲛⲓⲙⲁⲑⲏⲧⲏⲥ ⲛⲓⲙⲁⲑⲏⲧⲏⲥ ⲇⲉ ⲁⲩϯ ⲛ̀ⲛⲓⲙⲏϣ.
19 فَأَمَرَ الْجُمُوعَ بِأَنْ يَتَّكِئُوا عَلَى الْعُشْبِ. ثُمَّ أَخَذَ الْأَرْغِفَةَ الْخَمْسَةَ وَالسَّمَكَتَيْنِ، وَرَفَعَ نَظَرَهُ نَحْوَ السَّمَاءِ وَبَارَكَهَا وَقَسَّمَهَا وَأَعْطَى الْأَرْغِفَةَ لِلتَّلَامِيذِ، وَالتَّلَامِيذُ أَعْطَوُا الْجُمُوعَ.
20 So they all ate and were filled, and they took up twelve baskets full of the fragments that remained.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁⲩⲟⲩⲱⲙ ⲧⲏⲣⲟⲩ ⲁⲩⲥⲓ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁⲩⲉⲗ ⲡ̀ϩⲟⲩⲟ̀ ⲛ̀ⲛⲓⲗⲁⲕϩ ⲁⲩⲙⲁϩ ⲓ︦ⲃ︦ ⲛ̀ⲕⲟⲧ ⲉⲩⲙⲉϩ.
20 فَأَكَلَ الْجَمِيعُ وَشَبِعُوا. ثُمَّ رَفَعُوا مَا فَضَلَ مِنَ الْكِسَرِ اثْنَتَيْ عَشْرَةَ قُفَّةً مَمْلُوءةً.
21 Now those who had eaten were about five thousand men, besides women and children.
Ⲛⲏ ⲇⲉ ⲉ̀ⲛⲁⲩⲟⲩⲱⲙ ⲛⲁⲩⲉⲣ ⲉ︦ ⲛ̀ϣⲟ ⲛ̀ⲣⲱⲙⲓ ⲭⲱⲣⲓⲥ ⲁ̀ⲗⲟⲩ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲥ̀ϩⲓⲙⲓ.
21 وَالْآكِلُونَ كَانُوا نَحْوَ خَمْسَةِ آلَافِ رَجُلٍ، مَا عَدَا الْأَوْلَادَ وَالنِّسَاءَ.