Stand in the fear of God and listen to the Holy Gospel. A reading from the Gospel according to our teacher Saint Matthew the Evangelist, and the pure disciple. May his blessings be with us all.
قِفُوا بِخَوْفِ اللهِ، وَأَنْصِتُوا لِسَمَاعِ الإِنْجِيلِ الْمُقَدَّسِ. فَصْلٌ مِنْ بِشَارَةِ الإِنْجِيلِ لِمُعَلِّمِنَا مَارْ متى الْبَشِيرِ، التِّلْمِيذِ الطَّاهِرِ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
From the Psalms of our teacher David the prophet. May his blessings be with us all.
مِنْ مَزَامِيرِ تَرَاتِيلِ مُعَلِّمِنَا دَاوُدَ النَّبِيِّ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
Matins Psalm
المزمور
	Psalms 17:17-18
(مزامير 17: 17-18)
For they are stronger than me. They confronted me in the day of my calamity. But the Lord was my support.
Ϫⲉ ⲁⲩⲧⲁⲅⲣⲟ ⲉ̀ϩⲟⲧⲉⲣⲟⲓ: ⲁⲩⲉⲣϣⲟⲣⲡ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟⲓ: ϧⲉⲛ ⲡ̀ⲉ̀ϩⲟⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲡⲁⲧ̀ϩⲉⲙⲕⲟ: ⲁ ⲡ̀Ϭⲟⲓⲥ ϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲛⲏⲓ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩⲧⲁϫⲣⲟ. ⲁ︦ⲗ︦.
لِأَنَّهُمْ تَقَوَّوْا أَكْثَرَ مِنِّي، أَدْرَكُونِي، فِي يَوْمِ ضُرِّي. وَكَانَ الرَّبُّ سَنَدِي.
People:
Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
الليلويا.
	Psalm Trailer for the Pope or a Bishop
(Ⲙⲁⲣⲟⲩϭⲁⲥϥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲧ̀ⲉⲕⲕ̀ⲗⲏⲥⲓⲁ̀...)
People:
Amen Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲙⲏⲛ Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
امين الليلويا.
Then the introduction to the Gospel is read.
ثم تقال مقدمة الأنجيل وهي:
Reader:
Blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord. Our Lord, God, Savior and King of us all, Jesus Christ, Son of the living God to whom is glory forever. Amen.
القارﺉُ:
مباركٌ الآتي باسمِ الربِّ إلهِ القواتِ، ربُّنا وإلهُنا ومخلصُنا وملكُنا كلِّنا، يسوعُ المسيحُ، ابنُ اللهِ الحيِّ، الذي لهُ المجدُ إلى الأبدِ. آمين.
Matins Gospel
الإنجيل
	Matthew 5:17-24
(متى 5: 17-24)
17 “Do not think that I came to destroy the Law or the Prophets. I did not come to destroy but to fulfill.
Ⲙ̀ⲡⲉⲣⲙⲉⲩⲓ ϫⲉ ⲉ̀ⲧⲁⲓⲓ̀ ⲉ̀ⲃⲉⲗ ⲡⲓⲛⲟⲙⲟⲥ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ⲓⲉ ⲛⲓⲡⲣⲟⲫⲏⲧⲏⲥ ⲛⲉⲧⲁⲓⲓ̀ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗⲟⲩ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ⲁⲛ ⲁⲗⲗⲁ ⲉ̀ϫⲟⲕⲟⲩ.
17 لَا تَظُنُّوا أَنِّي جِئْتُ لأَحُلَّ النَّامُوسَ أَوِ الأَنْبِيَاءَ. مَا جِئْتُ لأَحُلَّ بَلْ لأُكَمِّلَ.
18 For assuredly, I say to you, till heaven and earth pass away, one jot or one tittle will by no means pass from the law till all is fulfilled.
Ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ ⲅⲁⲣ ϯϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ⲛⲱⲧⲉⲛ ϫⲉ ϣⲁⲧⲉ ⲧ̀ⲫⲉ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲡ̀ⲕⲁϩⲓ ⲥⲓⲛⲓ ⲟⲩⲓⲱⲧⲁ ⲓⲉ ⲟⲩϣⲱⲗϩ ⲛ̀ⲛⲉϥⲥⲓⲛⲓ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗϧⲉⲛ ⲡⲓⲛⲟⲙⲟⲥ ϣⲁⲧⲉ ⲛⲁⲓ ⲧⲏⲣⲟⲩ ϣⲱⲡⲓ.
18 الْحَقَّ أَقُولُ لَكُمْ: إِنَّهُ إِلَى أَنْ تَزُولَ السَّمَاءُ وَالأَرْضُ لَا يَزُولُ حَرْفٌ وَاحِدٌ أَوْ نُقْطَةٌ وَاحِدَةٌ مِنَ النَّامُوسِ حَتَّى يَكُونَ الكُلُّ.
19 Whoever therefore breaks one of the least of these commandments, and teaches men so, shall be called least in the kingdom of heaven; but whoever does and teaches them, he shall be called great in the kingdom of heaven.
Ⲫⲏ ⲟⲩⲛ ⲉⲑⲛⲁⲃⲉⲗ ⲟⲩⲓ̀ ⲛ̀ⲛⲁⲓⲕⲟⲩϫⲓ ⲛ̀ⲉⲛⲧⲟⲗⲏ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉϥϯⲥ̀ⲃⲱ ⲛ̀ⲛⲓⲣⲱⲙⲓ ⲙ̀ⲡⲁⲓⲣⲏϯ ⲉⲉⲩⲉ̀ⲙⲟⲩϯ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟϥ ϫⲉ ⲡⲓⲕⲟⲩϫⲓ ϧⲉⲛ ϯⲙⲉⲧⲟⲩⲣⲟ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲛⲓⲫⲏⲟⲩⲓ̀ ⲫⲏ ⲇⲉ ⲉⲑⲛⲁⲓ̀ⲣⲓ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉϥϯⲥ̀ⲃⲱ ⲫⲁⲓ ⲉⲩⲉ̀ⲙⲟⲩϯ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟϥ ϫⲉ ⲡⲓⲛⲓϣϯ ϧⲉⲛ ϯⲙⲉⲧⲟⲩⲣⲟ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲛⲓⲫⲏⲟⲩⲓ̀.
19 فَكُلُّ مَنْ يَحُلُّ مِنْ تِلْكَ الْوَصَايَا الصُّغْرَى وَيُعْلِّمُ النَّاسَ هكَذَا، فَإِنَّهُ يُدْعَى صَغِيرًا فِي مَلَكُوتِ السَّمَاوَاتِ. وَأَمَّا مَنْ يَعْمَلُ وَيُعَلِّمُ، فَهذَا يُدْعَى عَظِيمًا فِي مَلَكُوتِ السَّمَاوَاتِ.
20 For I say to you, that unless your righteousness exceeds the righteousness of the scribes and Pharisees, you will by no means enter the kingdom of heaven.
Ϯϫⲱ ⲅⲁⲣ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ⲛⲱⲧⲉⲛ ϫⲉ ⲁ̀ⲣⲉϣ̀ⲧⲉⲙ ⲧⲉⲧⲉⲛⲙⲉⲑⲙⲏⲓ ⲉⲣϩⲟⲩⲟ̀ ⲉ̀ⲑⲁ ⲛⲓⲥⲁϧ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲛⲓⲪⲁⲣⲓⲥⲉⲟⲥ ⲛ̀ⲛⲉⲧⲉⲛⲓ̀ ⲉ̀ϧⲟⲩⲛ ⲉ̀ϯⲙⲉⲧⲟⲩⲣⲟ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲛⲓⲫⲏⲟⲩⲓ̀.
20 فَإِنِّي أَقُولُ لَكُمْ: إِنْ لَمْ يَزِدْ بِرُّكُمْ عَلَى الْكَتَبَةِ وَالْفَرِّيسِيِّينَ فَلَنْ تَدْخُلُوا مَلَكُوتَ السَّماوَاتِ.
21 “You have heard that it was said to those of old, ‘You shall not murder, and whoever murders will be in danger of the judgment.’
Ⲁ̀ⲣⲉⲧⲉⲛⲥⲱⲧⲉⲙ ϫⲉ ⲁⲩϫⲟⲥ ⲛ̀ⲛⲓⲁⲣⲭⲉⲟⲥ ϫⲉ ⲛ̀ⲛⲉⲕϧⲱⲧⲉⲃ ⲫⲏ ⲇⲉ ⲉⲑⲛⲁⲱ︦ⲧⲉⲃ ⲉϥⲉ̀ϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲉϥⲟⲓ ⲛ̀ⲉ̀ⲛⲟⲭⲟⲥ ⲉ̀ϯⲕ̀ⲣⲓⲥⲓⲥ.
21 قَدْ سَمِعْتُمْ أَنَّهُ قِيلَ للأوَّلِينَ: لَا تَقْتُلْ، وَمَنْ قَتَلَ يَكُونُ مُسْتَوْجِبَ الدَّيْنُونَةَ.
22 But I say to you that whoever is angry with his brother without a cause shall be in danger of the judgment. And whoever says to his brother, ‘Raca!’ shall be in danger of the council. But whoever says, ‘You fool!’ shall be in danger of hell fire.
Ⲁ̀ⲛⲟⲕ ⲇⲉ ϯϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ⲛⲱⲧⲉⲛ ϫⲉ ⲟⲩⲟⲛ ⲛⲓⲃⲉⲛ ⲉⲑⲛⲁϫⲱⲛⲧ ⲉ̀ⲡⲉϥⲥⲟⲛ ϩⲓⲕⲏ ⲉϥⲉ̀ϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲉϥⲟⲓ ⲛ̀ⲉ̀ⲛⲟⲭⲟⲥ ⲉ̀ϯⲕ̀ⲣⲓⲥⲓⲥ ⲫⲏⲉⲑⲛⲁϫⲟⲥ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉϥⲥⲟⲛ ϫⲉ ⲣⲁⲕⲁ ⲉϥⲉ̀ϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲉϥⲟⲓ ⲛ̀ⲉ̀ⲛⲟⲭⲟⲥ ⲉ̀ⲡⲓⲙⲁⲛϯϩⲁⲡ ⲫⲏ ⲇⲉ ⲉⲑⲛⲁϫⲟⲥ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉϥⲥⲟⲛ ϫⲉ ⲡⲓⲥⲟϫ ⲉϥⲉ̀ϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲉϥⲟⲓ ⲛ̀ⲉ̀ⲛⲟⲭⲟⲥ ⲉ̀ϯⲅⲉⲉⲛⲛⲁ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲡⲓⲭ̀ⲣⲱⲙ.
22 وَأَمَّا أَنَا فَأَقُولُ لَكُمْ: إِنَّ كُلَّ مَنْ يَغْضَبُ عَلَى أَخِيهِ بَاطِلًا يَكُونُ مُسْتَوْجِبَ الدَّيْنُونَةِ، وَمَنْ قَالَ لأَخِيهِ: رَقَا، يَسْتَوجِبُ الْمَجْمَعَ، وَمَنْ قَالَ لأخِيهِ: يَا أَحْمَقُ، يَسْتَوجِبُ نَارَ جَهَنَّمَ.
23 Therefore if you bring your gift to the altar, and there remember that your brother has something against you,
Ⲉ̀ϣⲱⲡ ⲟⲩⲛ ⲭ̀ⲛⲁⲓ̀ⲛⲓ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉⲕⲇⲱⲣⲟⲛ ⲉ̀ϩ̀ⲣⲏⲓ ⲉ̀ϫⲉⲛ ⲡⲓⲙⲁⲛⲉⲣϣⲱⲟⲩϣⲓ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉⲕⲉⲣⲫ̀ⲙⲉⲩⲓ ⲙ̀ⲙⲁⲩ ϫⲉ ⲟⲩⲟⲛ ⲟⲩⲁ̀ⲣⲓⲕⲓ ⲟⲩⲧⲱⲕ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲡⲉⲕⲥⲟⲛ.
23 فَإذَا قَدَّمَتَ قُرْبَانَكَ إلَى الْمَذْبَحِ، وَهُنَاكَ تَذَكَّرْتَ أَنَّ لأَخِيكَ شَيْئًا عَلَيْكَ،
24 leave your gift there before the altar, and go your way. First be reconciled to your brother, and then come and offer your gift.
Ⲭⲱ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉⲕⲇⲱⲣⲟⲛ ⲙ̀ⲙⲁⲩ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉⲙ̀ⲑⲟ ⲙ̀ⲡⲓⲙⲁⲛⲉⲣϣⲱⲟⲩϣⲓ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲙⲁϣⲉⲛⲁⲕ ⲛ̀ϣⲟⲣⲡ ϩⲱⲧⲡ ⲉ̀ⲡⲉⲕⲥⲟⲛ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲧⲟⲧⲉ ⲁ̀ⲙⲟⲩ ⲁ̀ⲛⲓⲟⲩⲓ̀ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉⲕⲇⲱⲣⲟⲛ ⲉ̀ϧⲟⲩⲛ.
24 فَدَعْ قُرْبَانَكَ هُنَاكَ أمَامَ الْمَذْبَحِ، وَاِمْضِ أَوَّلًا اِصْطَلَحْ مَعَ أَخِيكَ، وَحِينَئِذٍ تَعَالَ وَقَدِّمْ قُرْبَانَكَ.