Pauline Epistle
البولس
	Introduction to the Coptic Pauline Epistle
(Ⲡⲁⲩⲗⲟⲥ ⲫ̀ⲃⲱⲕ...)
	Conclusion to the Coptic Pauline Epistle
(Ⲡⲓϩ̀ⲙⲟⲧ ⲅⲁⲣ...)
	Response to the Pauline Epistle
(Ⲡⲓϩ̀ⲙⲟⲧ ⲅⲁⲣ...)
	Great Response to the Pauline Epistle
(Ⲡⲓϩ̀ⲙⲟⲧ ⲅⲁⲣ...)
	Alternate Response to the Pauline Epistle
(Ⲏ ⲁ̀ⲅⲁⲡⲏ...)
	Hymn of the Virtues
(Ϯⲙⲏϯ ⲥ̀ⲛⲟⲩϯ...)
	The Blessed
(Ⲧⲟⲩ ⲙⲁⲕⲁⲣⲓⲱ)
	1 Corinthians 3:1-8
(1 كورنثوس 3: 1-8)
Reader:
Paul, the servant of our Lord Jesus Christ, called to be an apostle, appointed to the Gospel of God. A reading from the first Epistle of our teacher Paul to the Corinthians. May his holy blessings be with us. Amen.
القارﺉُ:
بولس عبد يسوع المسيح الرسول المدعو المفرز لبشرى الله. فصل من رسالة معلمنا بولس الرسول الأولى الى اهل كورنثوس بركته تكون معنا. آمين.
1 And I, brethren, could not speak to you as to spiritual people but as to carnal, as to babes in Christ.
Ⲁ̀ⲛⲟⲕ ⲇⲉ ϩⲱ ⲛⲁⲥ̀ⲛⲏⲟⲩ ⲙ̀ⲡⲓϣ̀ϫⲉⲙϫⲟⲙ ⲉ̀ⲥⲁϫⲓ ⲛⲉⲙⲱⲧⲉⲛ ⲙ̀ⲫ̀ⲣⲏϯ ⲛ̀ϩⲁⲛⲡⲛ︦ⲁ︦ⲧⲓⲕⲟⲥ ⲁⲗⲗⲁ ⲙ̀ⲫ̀ⲣⲏϯ ⲛ̀ϩⲁⲛⲥⲁⲣⲕⲓⲕⲟⲥ ⲙ̀ⲫ̀ⲣⲏϯ ⲛ̀ϩⲁⲛⲕⲟⲩϫⲓ ⲛ̀ⲁ̀ⲗⲱⲟⲩⲓ̀ ϧⲉⲛ Ⲡⲭ︦ⲥ︦.︦.
1 وَأَنَا أَيْضًا أيُّهَا الْإِخْوَةُ لَمْ أَسْتَطِعْ أَنْ أُكَلِّمَكُمْ كَرُوحِيِّينَ، بَلْ كَجَسَدِيِّينَ كَأَطْفَالٍ في الْمَسِيحِ،
2 I fed you with milk and not with solid food; for until now you were not able to receive it, and even now you are still not able;
Ⲁⲓⲧ̀ⲥⲉ ⲑⲏⲛⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩⲉⲣⲱϯ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩϧ̀ⲣⲉ ⲁⲛ ⲧⲉ ⲛⲉ ⲙ̀ⲡⲁⲧⲉⲧⲉⲛϣ̀ϫⲉⲙϫⲟⲙ ⲅⲁⲣ ⲡⲉ ⲁⲗⲗⲁ ⲟⲩⲇⲉ ϯⲛⲟⲩ ⲟⲛ ⲙ̀ⲡⲁⲧⲉⲧⲉⲛϣ̀ϫⲉⲙϫⲟⲙ ⲉⲧⲓ ⲅⲁⲣ ⲛ̀ⲑⲱⲧⲉⲛ ϩⲁⲛⲥⲁⲣⲕⲓⲕⲟⲥ.
2 سَقَيْتُكُمْ لَبَنًا لَا طَعَامًا؛ لِأَنَّكُمْ لَمْ تَكُونُوا بَعْدُ تَسْتَطِيعُونَ، بَلِ الآنَ أَيْضًا لَا تَسْتَطِيعُونَ؛
3 for you are still carnal. For where there are envy, strife, and divisions among you, are you not carnal and behaving like mere men?
Ϩⲱⲥ ⲅⲁⲣ ⲉ̀ⲟⲩⲟⲛ ⲟⲩⲭⲟϩ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲟⲩϣ̀ϭⲛⲏⲛ ϧⲉⲛ ⲑⲏⲛⲟⲩ ⲙⲏ ⲛ̀ⲑⲱⲧⲉⲛ ϩⲁⲛⲥⲁⲣⲕⲓⲕⲟⲥ ⲁⲛ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁⲣⲉⲧⲉⲛⲙⲟϣⲓ ⲕⲁⲧⲁ ⲣⲱⲙⲓ.
3 لِأَنَّكُمْ بَعْدُ جَسَدِيُّونَ. فَإِنَّهُ إذْ فِيكُمْ حَسَدٌ وَخِصَامٌ، أَلَسْتُمْ جَسَدِيِّينَ وَتَسْلُكُونَ بِحَسَبِ الْبَشَرِ؟
4 For when one says, “I am of Paul,” and another, “I am of Apollos,” are you not carnal?
Ⲉϣⲱⲡ ⲅⲁⲣ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲟⲩⲁⲓ ϫⲟⲥ ϫⲉ ⲁ̀ⲛⲟⲕ ⲙⲉⲛ ⲁ̀ⲛⲟⲕ ⲫⲁ ⲡⲁⲩⲗⲟⲥ ⲕⲉⲟⲩⲁⲓ ⲇⲉ ϫⲉ ⲁ̀ⲛⲟⲕ ⲫⲁ ⲁⲡⲟⲗⲗⲱ ⲟⲩⲭⲓ ⲛ̀ⲑⲱⲧⲉⲛ ϩⲁⲛⲣⲱⲙⲓ.
4 لِأَنَّهُ إذَا قَالَ وَاحِدٌ: " أَنَا لِبُولُسَ " وَآخَرُ: " أَنَا لأَبُلُّوسَ " أَفَلَسْتُمْ بَشَرِيِّينَ؟
5 Who then is Apollos, and who is Paul, but ministers through whom you believed, as the Lord gave to each one?
Ⲟⲩ ⲟⲩⲛ ⲡⲉ ⲁⲡⲟⲗⲗⲱ ⲟⲩ ⲇⲉ ⲡⲉ ⲡⲁⲩⲗⲟⲥ ϩⲁⲛⲇⲓⲁ̀ⲕⲱⲛ ⲛⲉ ⲉ̀ⲁⲣⲉⲧⲉⲛⲛⲁϩϯ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ϩⲓⲧⲟⲧⲟⲩ ⲡⲓⲟⲩⲁⲓ ⲡⲓⲟⲩⲁⲓ ⲕⲁⲧⲁ ⲫ̀ⲣⲏϯ ⲉⲧⲁ Ⲡⲟ︦ⲥ︦ ϯ ⲛⲁϥ.
5 فَمَنْ هُوَ أَبُلُّوسُ، وَمَنْ هُوَ بُولُسُ؟ بَلْ خَادِمَانِ آمَنْتُمْ بِوَاسِطَتِهِمَا، وَكَمَا أَعْطَى الرَّبُّ لِكُلِّ وَاحِدٍ:
6 I planted, Apollos watered, but God gave the increase.
Ⲁ̀ⲛⲟⲕ ⲁⲓⲧⲱϫⲓ ⲁⲡⲟⲗⲗⲱ ⲁϥⲧ̀ⲥⲟ ⲁⲗⲗⲁ ⲫϯ ⲁϥⲑ̀ⲣⲟⲩⲁⲓⲁⲓ.
6 أَنَا غَرَسْتُ وَأَبُلُّوسُ سَقَى، لكِنَّ اللَّهَ كَانَ يُنْمِي،
7 So then neither he who plants is anything, nor he who waters, but God who gives the increase.
Ϩⲱⲥⲧⲉ ⲟⲩⲇⲉ ⲫⲏⲉⲧⲧⲱϫⲓ ⲟⲩⲇⲉ ⲫⲏⲉⲧⲧ̀ⲥⲟ ϩ̀ⲗⲓ ⲡⲉ ⲁⲗⲗⲁ ⲫϯ ⲉⲧⲑ̀ⲣⲟ ⲙ̀ⲙⲱⲟⲩ ⲉ̀ⲁⲓⲁⲓ.
7 إِذًا لَيْسَ الْغَارِسُ شَيْئًا وَلَا السَّاقِي، بَلِ اللَّهُ الَّذِي يُنْمِي،
8 Now he who plants and he who waters are one, and each one will receive his own reward according to his own labor.
Ⲫⲏ ⲇⲉ ⲉⲧⲧⲱϫⲓ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲫⲏⲉⲧⲥⲟ ⲟⲩⲁⲓ ⲛⲉ ⲡⲓⲟⲩⲁⲓ ⲇⲉ ⲡⲓⲟⲩⲁⲓ ϥ̀ⲛⲁϭⲓ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉϥⲃⲉⲭⲉ ⲕⲁⲧⲁ ⲡⲉϥϧⲓⲥⲓ ⲙ̀ⲙⲓⲛ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟϥ.
8 وَالْغَارِسُ وَالسَّاقِي هُمَا وَاحِدٌ، وَلكِنَّ كُلَّ وَاحِدٍ سَيَأْخُذُ أُجْرَتَهُ بِحَسَبِ تَعَبِهِ.
The grace of God the Father be with you all. Amen.
نعمة الله الآب تكون مع جميعِكم. آمين.