Stand in the fear of God and listen to the Holy Gospel. A reading from the Gospel according to our teacher Saint Mark the Evangelist, and the pure disciple. May his blessings be with us all.
قِفُوا بِخَوْفِ اللهِ، وَأَنْصِتُوا لِسَمَاعِ الإِنْجِيلِ الْمُقَدَّسِ. فَصْلٌ مِنْ بِشَارَةِ الإِنْجِيلِ لِمُعَلِّمِنَا مَارْ مرقس الْبَشِيرِ، التِّلْمِيذِ الطَّاهِرِ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
From the Psalms of our teacher David the prophet. May his blessings be with us all.
مِنْ مَزَامِيرِ تَرَاتِيلِ مُعَلِّمِنَا دَاوُدَ النَّبِيِّ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
Liturgy Psalm
المزمور
	Psalms 131:7,1
(مزامير 131: 7,1)
Let Your priests be clothed with righteousness, And let Your saints shout for joy. For Your servant David's sake. Lord, remember David And all his afflictions; How he swore to the Lord, And vowed to the Mighty One of Jacob:.
Ⲛⲉⲕⲟⲩⲏⲃ ⲉⲩⲉ̀ϯϩⲓⲱ̀ⲧⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩⲙⲉⲑⲙⲏⲓ: ⲛⲏⲉ︦ⲑ︦ⲩ︦ ⲛ̀ⲧⲁⲕ ⲉⲩⲉ̀ⲑⲉⲗⲏⲗ ⲉⲑⲃⲉ Ⲇⲁⲩⲓⲇ ⲡⲉϥⲃⲱⲕ: ⲁ̀ⲣⲓⲫ̀ⲙⲉⲩⲓ̀ Ⲡⲟ︦ⲥ︦ ⲛ̀Ⲇⲁⲩⲓⲇ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲧⲉϥⲙⲉⲧⲣⲁⲩϣ ⲧⲏⲣⲥ: ⲙ̀ⲫ̀ⲣⲏϯ ⲉ̀ⲧⲁϥⲱⲣⲕ ⲙ̀Ⲡⲟ︦ⲥ︦ ⲁϥⲧⲱⲃϩ ⲙ̀Ⲫϯ ⲛ̀Ⲓⲁⲕⲱⲃ.ⲁ︦ⲗ︦.
كَهَنَتُكَ يَلْبَسُونَ الْبِرَّ، وقِدِّيسُوكَ يَبْتَهِجُونَ مِنْ أَجْلِ دَاوُدَ عَبْدِكَ. اُذْكُرْ يَا رَبُّ دَاودَ وَكُلَّ دَعَتِهِ. كَمَا أَقْسَمَ لِلرَّبِّ وَنَذَرَ لإلَهِ يَعْقُوبَ. هَلِّلُويَا.
People:
Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
الليلويا.
	Psalm Trailer for the Pope or a Bishop
(Ⲙⲁⲣⲟⲩϭⲁⲥϥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲧ̀ⲉⲕⲕ̀ⲗⲏⲥⲓⲁ̀...)
People:
Amen Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲙⲏⲛ Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
امين الليلويا.
Then the introduction to the Gospel is read.
ثم تقال مقدمة الأنجيل وهي:
Reader:
Blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord. Our Lord, God, Savior and King of us all, Jesus Christ, Son of the living God to whom is glory forever. Amen.
القارﺉُ:
مباركٌ الآتي باسمِ الربِّ إلهِ القواتِ، ربُّنا وإلهُنا ومخلصُنا وملكُنا كلِّنا، يسوعُ المسيحُ، ابنُ اللهِ الحيِّ، الذي لهُ المجدُ إلى الأبدِ. آمين.
Liturgy Gospel
الإنجيل
	Mark 9:33-41
(مرقس 9: 33-41)
33 Then He came to Capernaum. And when He was in the house He asked them, “What was it you disputed among yourselves on the road?”
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁϥⲓ̀ ⲉ̀ϧⲟⲩⲛ ⲉ̀Ⲕⲁⲫⲁⲣⲛⲁⲟⲩⲙ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉ̀ⲧⲁϥⲓ̀ ⲉ̀ϧⲟⲩⲛ ⲉ̀ⲡⲓⲏⲓ ⲛⲁϥϣⲓⲛⲓ ⲙ̀ⲙⲱⲟⲩ ϫⲉ ⲟⲩ ⲉ̀ⲛⲁⲣⲉⲧⲉⲛⲙⲟⲕⲙⲉⲕ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟϥ ϩⲓ ⲫ̀ⲙⲱⲓⲧ.
33 وَجَاءَ إِلَى كَفْرِنَاحُومَ. وَلَمَّا دَخَلَ إِلَى الْبَيْتِ سَأَلَهُمْ: " في أَيِّ شَيْءٍ كُنْتُمْ تُفَكِّرُونَ في الطَّرِيقِ؟ ".
34 But they kept silent, for on the road they had disputed among themselves who would be the greatest.
Ⲛ̀ⲑⲱⲟⲩ ⲇⲉ ⲛⲁⲩⲭⲱ ⲛ̀ⲣⲱⲟⲩ ⲛⲁⲩⲥⲁϫⲓ ⲅⲁⲣ ⲡⲉ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲛ̀ⲛⲟⲩⲉ̀ⲣⲏⲟⲩ ϩⲓ ⲫ̀ⲙⲱⲓⲧ ϫⲉ ⲛⲓⲙ ⲙ̀ⲙⲱⲟⲩ ⲡⲉ ⲡⲓⲛⲓϣϯ.
34 فَسَكَتُوا؛ لِأَنَّهُمْ كَانُوا في الطَّرِيقِ يَقُولُونَ بَعضُهُمْ مَعَ بَعْضٍ مَنْ هُوَ الأَعْظَمُ فِيهِمْ.
35 And He sat down, called the twelve, and said to them, “If anyone desires to be first, he shall be last of all and servant of all.”
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉ̀ⲧⲁϥϩⲉⲙⲥⲓ ⲁϥⲙⲟⲩϯ ⲉ̀ⲡⲓ ⲓ︦ⲃ︦ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ⲛⲱⲟⲩ ϫⲉ ⲫⲏⲉⲑⲟⲩⲱϣ ⲉ̀ⲉⲣϩⲟⲩⲓⲧ ⲉϥⲉ̀ⲉⲣϧⲁⲉ̀ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩⲟⲛ ⲛⲓⲃⲉⲛ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲇⲓⲁ̀ⲕⲱⲛ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩⲟⲛ ⲛⲓⲃⲉⲛ.
35 فَجَلَسَ وَدَعَا الاثْنَيْ عَشَرَ وَقَالَ لَهُمْ: " مَنْ أَرَادَ أَنْ يَكُونَ أَوَّلًا فَلْيَكُنْ آخِرَ الكُلِّ وَخَادِمًا لِلجَمِيعِ ".
36 Then He took a little child and set him in the midst of them. And when He had taken him in His arms, He said to them,
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉ̀ⲧⲁϥϭⲓ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩⲁ̀ⲗⲟⲩ ⲁϥⲧⲁϩⲟϥ ⲉ̀ⲣⲁⲧϥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲧⲟⲩⲙⲏϯ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉ̀ⲧⲁϥⲁ̀ⲙⲟⲛⲓ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟϥ ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ⲛⲱⲟⲩ.
36 فَأَخَذَ صَبِيًّا وَأَقَامَهُ في وَسَطِهِمْ ثُمَّ أَمْسَكَهُ وَقَالَ لَهُمْ:
37 “Whoever receives one of these little children in My name receives Me; and whoever receives Me, receives not Me but Him who sent Me.”
Ϫⲉ ⲫⲏⲉⲑⲛⲁϣⲉⲡ ⲟⲩⲁⲓ ⲛ̀ⲛⲁⲓⲁ̀ⲗⲱⲟⲩⲓ̀ ⲙ̀ⲡⲁⲓⲣⲏϯ ⲉ̀ⲡⲁⲣⲁⲛ ⲁ̀ⲛⲟⲕ ⲡⲉⲧⲉϥϣⲱⲡ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲓ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲫⲏⲉⲧϣⲱⲡ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲓ ⲁ̀ⲛⲟⲕ ⲁⲛ ⲡⲉⲧⲉϥϣⲱⲡ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲓ ⲁⲗⲗⲁ ⲁϥϣⲱⲡ ⲙ̀ⲫⲏⲉ̀ⲧⲁϥⲧⲁⲟⲩⲟⲓ.
37 " مَنْ يَقْبَلُ وَاحِدًا مِنْ الأَوْلَادِ مِثْلَ هذَا بِاسْمِي يَقْبَلُنِي، وَمَنْ يَقْبَلُنِي فَلَيْسَ يَقْبَلُنِي أَنَا بَلْ قَبِلَ الَّذِي أَرْسَلَنِي ".
38 Now John answered Him, saying, “Teacher, we saw someone who does not follow us casting out demons in Your name, and we forbade him because he does not follow us.”
Ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ⲛⲁϥ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ Ⲓⲱⲁⲛⲛⲏⲥ ϫⲉ ⲫ̀ⲣⲉϥϯⲥ̀ⲃⲱ ⲁⲛⲛⲁⲩ ⲉ̀ⲟⲩⲁⲓ ⲉϥϩⲓ ⲇⲉⲙⲱⲛ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ϧⲉⲛ ⲡⲉⲕⲣⲁⲛ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁⲛⲧⲁϩⲛⲟ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟϥ ϫⲉ ⲛ̀ϥ̀ⲟⲩⲉϩ ⲛ̀ⲥⲱⲛ ⲁⲛ.
38 فَقَالَ لَهُ يُوحَنَّا: " يَا مُعَلِّمُ، رَأَيْنَا وَاحِدًا يُخْرجُ شَيَاطِينَ بِاسْمِكَ فَمَنَعْنَاهُ؛ لِأَنَّهُ لَا يَتْبَعُنَا ".
39 But Jesus said, “Do not forbid him, for no one who works a miracle in My name can soon afterward speak evil of Me.
Ⲓⲏ︦ⲥ︦ ⲇⲉ ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ⲛⲁϥ ϫⲉ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉⲣⲧⲁϩⲛⲟ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟϥ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲛ ϩ̀ⲗⲓ ⲅⲁⲣ ⲫⲏⲉⲑⲛⲁⲓ̀ⲣⲓ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩϫⲟⲙ ⲉ̀ϫⲉⲛ ⲡⲁⲣⲁⲛ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉϥϫⲉⲙϫⲟⲙ ⲛ̀ⲭⲱⲗⲉⲙ ⲉ̀ⲥⲁϫⲓ ⲉϥϩⲱⲟⲩ ϧⲁⲣⲟⲓ.
39 فَقَالَ لَهُ يَسُوعُ: " لَا تَمْنَعُوهُ؛ لِأَنَّهُ لَيْسَ أَحَدٌ يَصْنَعُ قُوَّةً بِاسْمِي وَيَسْتَطِيعُ سَرِيعًا أَنْ يَقُولَ عَلَيَّ شَرًّا.
40 For he who is not against us is on our side.
Ⲫⲏ ⲅⲁⲣ ⲉ̀ⲧⲉ ⲛ̀ϥ̀ϯⲟⲩⲃⲏⲛ ⲁⲛ ⲁϥϯ ⲉ̀ϫⲱⲛ.
40 لِأَنَّ مَنْ لَيْسَ عَلَيْنَا فَهُوَ مَعَنَا.
41 For whoever gives you a cup of water to drink in My name, because you belong to Christ, assuredly, I say to you, he will by no means lose his reward.
Ⲫⲏ ⲅⲁⲣ ⲉⲑⲛⲁⲧ̀ⲥⲉ ⲑⲏⲛⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩⲁ̀ⲫⲟⲧ ⲙ̀ⲙⲱⲟⲩ ϧⲉⲛ ⲡⲁⲣⲁⲛ ϫⲉ ⲛ̀ⲑⲱⲧⲉⲛ ⲛⲁ Ⲡⲭ︦ⲥ︦ ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ ϯϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ⲛⲱⲧⲉⲛ ϫⲉ ⲛ̀ⲛⲉϥⲧⲁⲕⲟ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲡⲉϥⲃⲉⲭⲉ.
41 لِأَنَّ مَنْ يُسْقِيكُمْ كَأْسَ مَاءٍ بِاسْمِي لِأَنَّكُمْ لِلْمَسِيحِ فَالْحَقَّ أَقُولُ لَكُمْ: إِنَّهُ لَا يُضِيعُ أَجْرَهُ ".