Stand in the fear of God and listen to the Holy Gospel. A reading from the Gospel according to our teacher Saint Luke the Evangelist, and the pure disciple. May his blessings be with us all.
قِفُوا بِخَوْفِ اللهِ، وَأَنْصِتُوا لِسَمَاعِ الإِنْجِيلِ الْمُقَدَّسِ. فَصْلٌ مِنْ بِشَارَةِ الإِنْجِيلِ لِمُعَلِّمِنَا مَارْ لوقا الْبَشِيرِ، التِّلْمِيذِ الطَّاهِرِ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
From the Psalms of our teacher David the prophet. May his blessings be with us all.
مِنْ مَزَامِيرِ تَرَاتِيلِ مُعَلِّمِنَا دَاوُدَ النَّبِيِّ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
Vespers Psalm
المزمور
	Psalms 31:12,7
(مزامير 31: 12,7)
Be glad in the Lord and rejoice, you righteous; And shout for joy, all you upright in heart! For this cause everyone who is godly shall pray to You In a time when You may be found.
Ⲟⲩⲛⲟϥ ⲉ̀ϫⲉⲛ Ⲡⲟ︦ⲥ︦ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲑⲉⲗⲏⲗ ⲛⲓⲑ̀ⲙⲏⲓ: ϣⲟⲩϣⲟⲩ ⲙ̀ⲙⲱⲧⲉⲛ ⲟⲩⲟⲛ ⲛⲓⲃⲉⲛ ⲉⲧⲥⲟⲩⲧⲱⲛ ϧⲉⲛ ⲡⲟⲩϩⲏⲧ: ⲉ̀ϩ̀ⲣⲏⲓ ⲉ̀ϫⲉⲛ ⲑⲁⲓ ⲉⲩⲉ̀ⲧⲱⲃϩ ⲉ̀ⲡ̀ϣⲱⲓ ϩⲁⲣⲟⲕ: ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲟⲩⲟⲛ ⲛⲓⲃⲉⲛ ⲉ︦ⲑ︦ⲩ︦ ϧⲉⲛ ⲟⲩⲥⲏⲟⲩ ⲉϥⲥⲟⲩⲧⲱⲛ. ⲁ︦ⲗ︦.
افْرَحُوا أيُّهَا الصِّدِّيقُونَ بِالرَّبِّ وَابْتَهِجُوا. وَافْتَخِرُوا يا جَمِيعَ مُسْتَقِيمِي الْقُلُوبِ. مِنْ أَجْلِ هذَا يَبْتَهِلُ إليْكَ كُلُّ القِدِّيسِينَ، في أوَانٍ مُسْتَقِيمٍ. هَلِّلُويَا.
People:
Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
الليلويا.
	Psalm Trailer for the Pope or a Bishop
(Ⲙⲁⲣⲟⲩϭⲁⲥϥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲧ̀ⲉⲕⲕ̀ⲗⲏⲥⲓⲁ̀...)
People:
Amen Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲙⲏⲛ Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
امين الليلويا.
Then the introduction to the Gospel is read.
ثم تقال مقدمة الأنجيل وهي:
Reader:
Blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord. Our Lord, God, Savior and King of us all, Jesus Christ, Son of the living God to whom is glory forever. Amen.
القارﺉُ:
مباركٌ الآتي باسمِ الربِّ إلهِ القواتِ، ربُّنا وإلهُنا ومخلصُنا وملكُنا كلِّنا، يسوعُ المسيحُ، ابنُ اللهِ الحيِّ، الذي لهُ المجدُ إلى الأبدِ. آمين.
Vespers Gospel
الإنجيل
	Luke 22:24-30
(لوقا 22: 24-30)
24 Now there was also a dispute among them, as to which of them should be considered the greatest.
Ⲁⲥϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲇⲉ ⲟⲛ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲟⲩⲫⲓⲗⲟⲛⲓⲕⲓⲁ̀ ⲛ̀ϧⲏⲧⲟⲩ ϫⲉ ⲛⲓⲙ ⲙ̀ⲙⲱⲟⲩ ⲡⲉ ⲡⲓⲛⲓϣϯ.
24 وَكَانَتْ بَيْنَهُمْ أَيْضًا مُشَاجَرَةٌ أَنَّهُ مَنْ مِنْهُمْ يَكُونُ الأَكْبَرَ.
25 And He said to them, “The kings of the Gentiles exercise lordship over them, and those who exercise authority over them are called ‘benefactors.’
Ⲛ̀ⲑⲟϥ ⲉ ⲉϫⲁϥ ⲛⲱⲟⲩ ϫⲉ ⲛⲓⲟⲩⲣⲱⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲛⲓⲉⲑⲛⲟⲥ ⲥⲉⲟⲓ ⲛ̀ϭⲟⲓⲥ ⲉ̀ⲣⲱⲟⲩ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛⲏⲉⲧⲉⲣϣⲓϣⲓ ⲉ̀ϫⲱⲟⲩ ⲥⲉⲙⲟⲩϯ ⲉ̀ⲣⲱⲟⲩ ϫⲉ ⲛⲓⲣⲉϥⲉⲣⲡⲉⲑⲛⲁⲛⲉϥ.
25 فَقَالَ لَهُمْ: " مُلُوكُ الأُمَمِ يَسُودُونَهُمْ، وَالْمُتَسَلِّطُونَ عَلَيْهِمْ يُدْعَوْنَ الْمُحْسِنِينَ.
26 But not so among you; on the contrary, he who is greatest among you, let him be as the younger, and he who governs as he who serves.
Ⲛ̀ⲑⲱⲧⲉⲛ ⲇⲉ ⲙ̀ⲡⲁⲓⲣⲏϯ ⲁⲛ ⲁⲗⲗⲁ ⲡⲓⲛⲓϣϯ ⲉⲧϧⲉⲛ ⲑⲏⲛⲟⲩ ⲙⲁⲣⲉϥⲉⲣ ⲙ̀ⲫ̀ⲣⲏϯ ⲙ̀ⲡⲓϧⲉⲗϣⲓ̀ⲣⲓ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲡⲓϩⲏⲅⲟⲩⲙⲉⲛⲟⲥ ⲙ̀ⲫ̀ⲣⲏϯ ⲙ̀ⲡⲓⲇⲓⲁ̀ⲕⲱⲛ.
26 وَأمَّا أَنْتُمْ فَلَيْسَ هكَذَا، بَلِ الكَبِيرُ فِيكُمْ لِيَكُنْ كَالأَصْغَرِ، وَالْمُتَقَدِّمُ كَالْخَادِمِ؛
27 For who is greater, he who sits at the table, or he who serves? Is it not he who sits at the table? Yet I am among you as the One who serves.
Ⲛⲓⲙ ⲅⲁⲣ ⲡⲉ ⲡⲓⲛⲓϣϯ ⲫⲏⲉⲑⲣⲱⲧⲉⲃ ϣⲁⲛ ⲫⲏⲉⲧⲉⲣⲇⲓⲁ̀ⲕⲱⲛ ⲙⲏ ⲫⲏⲉⲑⲣⲱⲧⲉⲃ ⲁⲛ ⲡⲉ ⲁ̀ⲛⲟⲕ ⲡⲉϯⲭⲏ ϧⲉⲛ ⲉⲧⲉⲛⲙⲏϯ ⲙ̀ⲫ̀ⲣⲏϯ ⲙ̀ⲫⲏⲉⲧⲉⲣⲇⲓⲁ̀ⲕⲱⲛ.
27 لِأَنْ مَنْ هُوَ الأَكْبَرُ: ألَّذِي يَتَّكِئُ أَمِ الَّذِي يَخْدُمُ؟ ألَيْسَ الَّذِي يَتَّكِئُ؟ وَلكِنِّي أَنَا في وَسَطِكُمْ كَالَّذِي يَخْدُمُ.
28 “But you are those who have continued with Me in My trials.
Ⲛ̀ⲑⲱⲧⲉⲛ ⲇⲉ ⲛⲏⲉⲧⲁⲩⲟϩⲓ ⲛⲉⲙⲏⲓ ϧⲉⲛ ⲛⲁⲡⲓⲣⲁⲥⲙⲟⲥ.
28 أَنْتُمُ الَّذِينَ ثَبَتُّم مَعِي في تَجَارِبِي،
29 And I bestow upon you a kingdom, just as My Father bestowed one upon Me,
Ⲁ̀ⲛⲟⲕ ϩⲱ ϯⲛⲁⲥⲉⲙⲛⲓ ⲉⲙⲱⲧⲉⲛ ⲕⲁⲧⲁⲫ̀ⲣⲏϯ ⲉⲧⲁϥⲥⲉⲙⲛⲓ ⲛⲉⲙⲏⲓ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲡⲁⲓⲱⲧ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩⲙⲉⲧⲟⲩⲣⲟ.
29 وَأَنَا أَيْضًا أُقَرِّرُ لَكُمْ مَلَكُوتًا كَمَا قَرَّرَ لِي أَبِي،
30 that you may eat and drink at My table in My kingdom, and sit on thrones judging the twelve tribes of Israel.”
Ϩⲓⲛⲁ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉⲧⲉⲛⲟⲩⲱⲙ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉⲧⲉⲛⲥⲱ ϩⲓ ⲁⲧ̀ⲣⲁⲡⲉⲍⲁ ⲉⲛ ⲧⲁⲙⲉⲧⲟⲩⲣⲟ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉⲣⲉⲧⲉⲛϩⲉⲙⲥⲓ ϩⲓϫⲉⲛ ϩⲁⲛⲑ̀ⲣⲟⲛⲟⲥ ⲉⲣⲉⲧⲉⲛⲉ̀ϯ ϩⲁⲡ ⲉ̀ϯⲓ︦ⲃ︦ ⲙ̀ⲫⲩⲗⲏ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲡⲓⲥ︦ⲗ︦.
30 لِتَأْكُلُوا وَتَشْرَبُوا مَعِي عَلَى مَائِدَتِي في مَلَكُوتِي، وَتَجْلِسُوا عَلَى كَرَاسِيَّ وَتَدِينُونَ أَسْبَاطَ إسْرَائِيلَ الاثْنَيْ عَشَرَ ".