Stand in the fear of God and listen to the Holy Gospel. A reading from the Gospel according to our teacher Saint John the Evangelist, and the pure disciple. May his blessings be with us all.
قِفُوا بِخَوْفِ اللهِ، وَأَنْصِتُوا لِسَمَاعِ الإِنْجِيلِ الْمُقَدَّسِ. فَصْلٌ مِنْ بِشَارَةِ الإِنْجِيلِ لِمُعَلِّمِنَا مَارْ يوحنا الْبَشِيرِ، التِّلْمِيذِ الطَّاهِرِ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
From the Psalms of our teacher David the prophet. May his blessings be with us all.
مِنْ مَزَامِيرِ تَرَاتِيلِ مُعَلِّمِنَا دَاوُدَ النَّبِيِّ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
Matins Psalm
المزمور
	Psalms 88:30, 29
(مزامير 88: 30, 29)
Blessed be the Lord forevermore! Amen and Amen. Lord, where are Your former mercies, O Lord, which You swore to David in Your truth?.
Ϥ̀ⲥ̀ⲙⲁⲣⲱⲟⲩⲧ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ Ⲡ̀ⲟ︦ⲥ︦ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ: ⲉⲥⲉ̀ϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲉⲥⲉ̀ϣⲱⲡⲓ. Ⲁⲩⲑⲱⲛ ⲛⲉⲕⲛⲁⲓ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ϣⲟⲣⲡ Ⲡ̀ⲟ︦ⲥ︦: ⲛⲏ ⲉⲧⲁⲕⲱⲣⲕ ⲙ̀ⲙⲱⲟⲩ ⲛ̀Ⲇⲁⲩⲓⲇ ϧⲉⲛ ⲟⲩⲙⲉⲑⲙⲏⲓ. Ⲁ︦ⲗ︦.
مُبَارَكٌ الرَّبُّ إِلَى الدَّهْرِ. يَكُونُ يَكُونُ. أَيْنَ هِيَ مَرَاحِمُكَ الْأُوَلُ يَا رَبُّ، الَّتِي حَلَفْتَ بِهَا لِدَاوُدَ بِالْحَقِّ.
People:
Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
الليلويا.
	Psalm Trailer for the Pope or a Bishop
(Ⲙⲁⲣⲟⲩϭⲁⲥϥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲧ̀ⲉⲕⲕ̀ⲗⲏⲥⲓⲁ̀...)
People:
Amen Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲙⲏⲛ Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
امين الليلويا.
Then the introduction to the Gospel is read.
ثم تقال مقدمة الأنجيل وهي:
Reader:
Blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord. Our Lord, God, Savior and King of us all, Jesus Christ, Son of the living God to whom is glory forever. Amen.
القارﺉُ:
مباركٌ الآتي باسمِ الربِّ إلهِ القواتِ، ربُّنا وإلهُنا ومخلصُنا وملكُنا كلِّنا، يسوعُ المسيحُ، ابنُ اللهِ الحيِّ، الذي لهُ المجدُ إلى الأبدِ. آمين.
Matins Gospel
الإنجيل
	John 12:44-50
(يوحنا 12: 44-50)
44 Then Jesus cried out and said, “He who believes in Me, believes not in Me but in Him who sent Me.
Ⲓⲏ︦ⲥ︦ ⲇⲉ ⲁϥⲱϣ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ϫⲉ ⲫⲏⲉⲑⲛⲁϩϯ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟⲓ ⲁϥⲛⲁϩϯ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟⲓ ⲁⲛ ⲁⲗⲗⲁ ⲁϥⲛⲁϩϯ ⲉ̀ⲫⲏⲉⲧⲁϥⲧⲁⲟⲩⲟⲓ.
44 فَنَادَى يَسُوعُ وَقَالَ: " الَّذِي يُؤْمِنُ بِي، لَيْسَ يُؤْمِنُ بِي بَلْ قَدْ آمَنَ بِالَّذِي أَرْسَلَنِي.
45 And he who sees Me sees Him who sent Me.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲫⲏⲉⲑⲛⲁⲩ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟⲓ ⲁϥⲛⲁⲩ ⲉ̀ⲫⲏⲉⲧⲁϥⲧⲁⲟⲩⲟⲓ.
45 وَالَّذِي يَرَانِي فَقَدْ رَأَى الَّذِي أَرْسَلَنِي.
46 I have come as a light into the world, that whoever believes in Me should not abide in darkness.
Ⲁ̀ⲛⲟⲕ ⲁⲓⲓ̀ ⲉⲩⲟⲩⲱⲓⲛⲓ ⲙ̀ⲡⲓⲕⲟⲥⲙⲟⲥ ϩⲓⲛⲁ ⲟⲩⲟⲛ ⲛⲓⲃⲉⲛ ⲉⲑⲛⲁϩϯ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟⲓ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉϥϣ̀ⲧⲉⲙⲟϩⲓ ϧⲉⲛ ⲡ̀ⲭⲁⲕⲓ.
46 أَنَا قَدْ جِئْتُ نُورًا لِلْعَالَمِ، حَتَّى إِنَّ كُلَّ مَنْ يُؤْمِنُ بِي لَا يَمْكُثُ فِي الظُّلْمَةِ.
47 And if anyone hears My words and does not believe, I do not judge him; for I did not come to judge the world but to save the world.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲫⲏⲉⲑⲛⲁⲥⲱⲧⲉⲙ ⲉ̀ⲛⲁⲥⲁϫⲓ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉϥϣ̀ⲧⲉⲙⲁ̀ⲣⲉϩ ⲉ̀ⲣⲱⲟⲩ ⲁ̀ⲛⲟⲕ ⲁⲛ ⲉⲑⲛⲁϯϩⲁⲡ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟϥ ⲛⲉⲧⲁⲓⲓ̀ ⲅⲁⲣ ϩⲓⲛⲁ ⲛ̀ⲧⲁϯ ϩⲁⲡ ⲉ̀ⲡⲓⲕⲟⲥⲙⲟⲥ ⲁⲗⲗⲁ ϩⲓⲛⲁ ⲛ̀ⲧⲁⲛⲟϩⲉⲙ ⲙ̀ⲡⲓⲕⲟⲥⲙⲟⲥ.
47 وَمَنْ يَسْمَعُ كَلَامِي وَلَا يَحْفَظُهُ فَأَنَا لَا أَدِينُهُ، لِأَنِّي لَمْ آتِ لِأَدِينَ الْعَالَمَ بَلْ لِأُخَلِّصَ الْعَالَمَ.
48 He who rejects Me, and does not receive My words, has that which judges him—the word that I have spoken will judge him in the last day.
Ⲫⲏⲉⲧϫⲱⲗ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲓ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉⲧⲉⲛ̀ϥ̀ϭ ⲓ ⲛ̀ⲛⲁⲥⲁϫⲓ ⲁⲛ ⲟⲩⲟⲛ ⲛ̀ⲧⲁϥ ⲙ̀ⲫⲏⲉⲑⲛⲁ ϯϩⲁⲡ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟϥ ⲡⲓⲥⲁϫⲓ ⲉⲧⲁⲓⲥⲁϫⲓ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟϥ ⲫⲏ ⲉ̀ⲧⲉⲙ̀ⲙⲁⲩ ⲉⲑⲛⲁϯϩⲁⲡ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟϥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲡⲓⲉ̀ϩⲟⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ϧⲁⲉ̀.
48 مَنْ يُنْكِرُنِي ولَا يَقْبَلُ كَلَامِي فَلَهُ مَنْ يَدِينُهُ. الْكَلَامُ الَّذِي تَكَلَّمْتُ بِهِ هُوَ يَدِينُهُ فِي الْيَوْمِ الْأَخِيرِ،
49 For I have not spoken on My own authority; but the Father who sent Me gave Me a command, what I should say and what I should speak.
Ϫⲉ ⲁ̀ⲛⲟⲕ ⲙ̀ⲡⲓⲥⲁϫⲓ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ϩⲓⲧⲟⲧ ⲙ̀ⲙⲁⲩⲁⲧ ⲁⲗⲗⲁ ⲫⲏⲉⲧⲁϥⲧⲁⲟⲩⲟⲓ ⲛ̀ⲑⲟϥ ⲡⲉⲧⲁϥϯⲉⲛⲧⲟⲗⲏ ⲛⲏⲓ ϫⲉ ⲟⲩ ⲡⲉϯⲛⲁϫⲟϥ ⲓⲉ ⲟⲩ ⲡⲉϯⲛⲁⲥⲁϫⲓ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟϥ.
49 لِأَنِّي لَمْ أَتَكَلَّمْ مِنْ نَفْسِي وَحَدِي، لَكِنَّ الْآبَ الَّذِي أَرْسَلَنِي هُوَ أَعْطَانِي وَصِيَّةً: مَاذَا أَقُولُ وَبِمَاذَا أَتَكَلَّمُ.
50 And I know that His command is everlasting life. Therefore, whatever I speak, just as the Father has told Me, so I speak.”
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ϯⲉ̀ⲙⲓ ϫⲉ ⲧⲉϥⲉⲛⲧⲟⲗⲏ ⲟⲩⲱⲛϧ ⲛ̀ⲉⲛⲉϩ ⲧⲉ ⲛⲏ ⲟⲩⲛ ⲁ̀ⲛⲟⲕ ⲉ̀ϯϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲱⲟⲩ ⲕⲁⲧⲁⲫ̀ⲣⲏϯ ⲉⲧⲁϥϫⲟⲥ ⲛⲏⲓ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲡⲁⲓⲱⲧ ⲡⲁⲓⲣⲏϯ ϯⲥⲁϫⲓ
50 وَأَعْلَمُ أَنَّ وَصِيَّتَهُ هِيَ حَيَاةٌ أَبَدِيَّةٌ. والَّذِي أَتَكَلَّمُ أَنَا بِهِ، فَكَمَا قَالَ لِي أَبِي هَكَذَا أَتَكَلَّمُ ".