Stand in the fear of God and listen to the Holy Gospel. A reading from the Gospel according to our teacher Saint Matthew the Evangelist, and the pure disciple. May his blessings be with us all.
قِفُوا بِخَوْفِ اللهِ، وَأَنْصِتُوا لِسَمَاعِ الإِنْجِيلِ الْمُقَدَّسِ. فَصْلٌ مِنْ بِشَارَةِ الإِنْجِيلِ لِمُعَلِّمِنَا مَارْ متى الْبَشِيرِ، التِّلْمِيذِ الطَّاهِرِ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
From the Psalms of our teacher David the prophet. May his blessings be with us all.
مِنْ مَزَامِيرِ تَرَاتِيلِ مُعَلِّمِنَا دَاوُدَ النَّبِيِّ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
Matins Psalm
المزمور
	Psalms 102:12, 11
(مزامير 102: 12, 11)
As a father pities his children, So the Lord pities those who fear Him. As far as the east is from the west, So far has He removed our transgressions from us.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲙ̀ⲫ̀ⲣⲏϯ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩⲓⲱⲧ ⲉϥϣⲉⲛϩⲏⲧ ϧⲁ ⲛⲉϥϣⲏⲣⲓ: ⲡⲁⲓⲣⲏϯ ⲁϥϣⲉⲛϩⲏⲧ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ Ⲡⲟ︦ⲥ︦ ϧⲁ ⲛⲏⲉ̀ⲧⲉⲣϩⲟϯ ϧⲁ ⲧⲉϥϩⲏ: ⲕⲁⲧⲁ ⲫ̀ⲣⲏϯ ⲉ̀ⲧⲉ ⲛⲓⲙⲁⲛ̀ϣⲁⲓ ⲟⲩⲏ̀ⲟⲩ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ⲛ̀ⲛⲓⲙⲁⲛϩⲱⲧⲡ: ⲁϥⲑ̀ⲣⲟⲩⲟⲩⲉⲓ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲛ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲛⲉⲛⲁ̀ⲛⲟⲙⲓⲁ̀. ⲁ︦ⲗ︦.
وَكَمَا يَتَرأَّفُ الْأَبُ عَلَى بَنِيهِ، كَذَلِكَ تَرَاءَفَ الرَّبُّ عَلَى خَائِفِيهِ. وَكَبُعْدِ الْمَشَارِقِ عَنِ الْمَغَارِبِ، أَبْعَدَ عَنَّا مَعَاصِيَنَا.
People:
Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
الليلويا.
	Psalm Trailer for the Pope or a Bishop
(Ⲙⲁⲣⲟⲩϭⲁⲥϥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲧ̀ⲉⲕⲕ̀ⲗⲏⲥⲓⲁ̀...)
People:
Amen Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲙⲏⲛ Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
امين الليلويا.
Then the introduction to the Gospel is read.
ثم تقال مقدمة الأنجيل وهي:
Reader:
Blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord. Our Lord, God, Savior and King of us all, Jesus Christ, Son of the living God to whom is glory forever. Amen.
القارﺉُ:
مباركٌ الآتي باسمِ الربِّ إلهِ القواتِ، ربُّنا وإلهُنا ومخلصُنا وملكُنا كلِّنا، يسوعُ المسيحُ، ابنُ اللهِ الحيِّ، الذي لهُ المجدُ إلى الأبدِ. آمين.
Matins Gospel
الإنجيل
	Matthew 11:25-30
(متى 11: 25-30)
25 At that time Jesus answered and said, “I thank You, Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that You have hidden these things from the wise and prudent and have revealed them to babes.
Ⲛ̀ϩ̀ⲣⲏⲓ ⲇⲉ ϧⲉⲛ ⲡⲓⲥⲏⲟⲩ ⲉ̀ⲧⲉⲙ̀ⲙⲁⲩ ⲁϥⲉ̀ⲣⲟⲩⲱ̀ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ Ⲓⲏ︦ⲥ︦ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ϫⲉ ϯⲟⲩⲱⲛϩ ⲛⲁⲕ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ Ⲫ̀ⲓⲱⲧ Ⲡⲟ︦ⲥ︦ ⲛ̀ⲧ̀ⲫⲉ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲡ̀ⲕⲁϩⲓ ϫⲉ ⲁⲕϩⲉⲡ ⲛⲁⲓ ⲉ̀ϩⲁⲛⲥⲁⲃⲉⲩ ⲛⲉⲙ ϩⲁⲛⲕⲁⲧϩⲏ ⲧ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁⲕϭⲟⲣⲡⲟⲩ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ⲛ̀ϩⲁⲛⲕⲟⲩϫⲓ ⲛ̀ⲁ̀ⲗⲱⲟⲩⲓ̀.
25 فِي ذَلِكَ الْوَقْتِ أَجَابَ يَسُوعُ وَقَالَ: " أَشْكُرُكَ أَيُّهَا الْآبُ رَبُّ السَّمَاءِ وَالْأَرْضِ، لِأَنَّكَ أَخْفَيْتَ هَذِهِ عَنِ الْحُكَمَاءِ وَالْفُهَمَاءِ وَأَعْلَنْتَهَا لِلْأَطْفَالِ.
26 Even so, Father, for so it seemed good in Your sight.
Ⲁ̀ϩⲁ Ⲫ̀ⲓⲱⲧ ϫⲉ ⲫⲁⲓ ⲡⲉ ⲡⲓϯⲙⲁϯ ⲉ̀ⲧⲁϥϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉⲕⲙ̀ⲑⲟ.
26 نَعَمْ أَيُّهَا الْآبُ، لِأَنَّ هَذِهِ هِيَ الْمَسَرَّةُ الَّتِي صَارَتْ أَمَامَكَ.
27 All things have been delivered to Me by My Father, and no one knows the Son except the Father. Nor does anyone know the Father except the Son, and the one to whom the Son wills to reveal Him.
Ϩⲱⲃ ⲛⲓⲃⲉⲛ ⲁ̀ Ⲫ̀ⲓⲱⲧ ⲧⲏⲓⲧⲟⲩ ⲉ̀ⲧⲟⲧ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲛ ϩ̀ⲗⲓ ⲥⲱⲟⲩⲛ ⲙ̀Ⲡ̀ϣⲏⲣⲓ ⲉ̀ⲃⲏⲗ ⲉ̀Ⲫ̀ⲓⲱⲧ ⲟⲩⲇⲉ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲛ ϩ̀ⲗⲓ ⲥⲱⲟⲩⲛ ⲙ̀Ⲫ̀ⲓⲱⲧ ⲉ̀ⲃⲏⲗ ⲉ̀Ⲡ̀ϣⲏⲣⲓ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲫⲏⲉ̀ⲧⲉϩⲛⲉ Ⲡ̀ϣⲏⲣⲓ ⲉ̀ϭⲱⲣⲡ ⲛⲁϥ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ.
27 كُلُّ شَيْءٍ قَدْ دُفِعَ إلَيَّ مِنْ أَبِي، وَلَيْسَ أَحَدٌ يَعْرِفُ الاِبْنَ إلَّا الْآبُ، وَلَا أَحَدٌ يَعْرِفُ الْآبَ إِلَّا الاِبْنُ وَمَنْ أَرَادَ الاِبْنُ أَنْ يُعْلِنَ لَهُ.
28 Come to Me, all you who labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest.
Ⲁ̀ⲙⲱⲓⲛⲓ ϩⲁⲣⲟⲓ ⲟⲩⲟⲛ ⲛⲓⲃⲉⲛ ⲉⲧϧⲟⲥⲓ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉⲧⲟⲡⲧ ϧⲁ ⲛⲟⲩⲉⲧⲫⲱⲟⲩⲓ̀ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁ̀ⲛⲟⲕ ⲉⲑⲛⲁϯⲙ̀ⲧⲟⲛ ⲛⲱⲧⲉⲛ.
28 تَعَالَوْا إِلَيَّ يَا جَمِيعَ الْمُتْعَبِينَ وَالثَّقِيلِي الْأَحْمَالِ، وَأَنَا أُرِيحُكُمْ.
29 Take My yoke upon you and learn from Me, for I am gentle and lowly in heart, and you will find rest for your souls.
Ⲁ̀ⲗⲓⲟⲩⲓ̀ ⲙ̀ⲡⲁⲛⲁϩⲃⲉϥ ⲉ̀ϫⲉⲛ ⲑⲏⲛⲟⲩ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁ̀ⲣⲓⲉ̀ⲙⲓ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲓ ϫⲉ ⲁ̀ⲛⲟⲕ ⲟⲩⲣⲉⲙⲣⲁⲩϣ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ϯⲑⲉⲃⲓⲏⲟⲩⲧ ϧⲉⲛ ⲡⲁϩⲏⲧ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉ̀ⲣⲉⲧⲉⲛⲉ̀ϫⲓⲙⲓ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩⲙⲁⲛⲉⲙⲧⲟⲛ ⲛ̀ⲛⲉⲧⲉⲛⲯⲩⲭⲏ.
29 اِحْمِلُوا نِيرِي عَلَيْكُمْ وَتَعَلَّمُوا مِنِّي؛ لِأَنِّي وَدِيعٌ وَمُتَوَاضِعُ الْقَلْبِ، فَتَجِدُوا رَاحَةً لِنُفُوسِكُمْ.
30 For My yoke is easy and My burden is light.”
Ⲡⲁⲛⲁϩⲃⲉϥ ⲅⲁⲣ ϥ̀ϩⲟⲗϫ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲧⲁⲉⲧⲫⲱ ⲁ̀ⲥⲓⲱ̀ⲟⲩ
30 لِأَنَّ نِيرِي هَيِّنٌ وَحِمْلِي خَفِيفٌ ".