Prophecies
النبوآت
	Proverbs 10:32-11:13
(أمثال 10: 32-11: 13)
A reading from the Proverbs of Solomon the prophet. May his holy blessings be with us. Amen.
Ⲉⲃⲟⲗϧⲉⲛ ⲛⲓⲡⲁⲣⲟⲓⲙⲓⲁ̀ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ Ⲥⲟⲗⲟⲙⲱⲛ ⲡⲓⲡ̀ⲣⲟⲫⲏⲧⲏⲥ: ⲉ̀ⲣⲉⲡⲉϥⲥ̀ⲙⲟⲩ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ ϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲛⲉⲙⲁⲛ ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ ⲉϥϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ:
من أمثال سليمان النبي بركته المقدسة تكون معنا. آمين.
32 The lips of the righteous know what is acceptable, But the mouth of the wicked what is perverse.
32 شَفَتَا الصِّدِّيقِ تَعْلَمَانِ الْمَرْضِيَّ، وَأَفْوَاهُ الْمُنَافِقِينَ تَعْلَمُ الْخَدَائِعَ.
1 Dishonest scales are an abomination to the Lord, But a just weight is His delight.
1 مِيزَانُ الْغِشِّ رِجْسٌ عِنْدَ الرَّبِّ، وَالْوَزْنُ الْكَافِي مَرْضَاتُهُ.
2 When pride comes, then comes shame; But with the humble is wisdom.
2 حَيْثُمَا تُوجَدُ الْكِبْرِيَاءُ فَهُنَاكَ الْهَوَانُ، وَمَعَ الْمُتَوَاضِعِينَ الْحِكْمَةُ.
3 The integrity of the upright will guide them, But the perversity of the unfaithful will destroy them.
3 دَعَةُ الْمُسْتَقِيمِينَ تُرْشِدُهُمْ، وَفَسَادُ الْغَادِرِينَ يُدَمِّرُهُمْ.
4 Riches do not profit in the day of wrath, But righteousness delivers from death.
4 لَا يَنْفَعُ الْغِنَى فِي يَوْمِ الْغَضَبِ، أَمَّا الْبِرُّ فَيُنَجِّي مِنَ الْمَوْتِ.
5 The righteousness of the blameless will direct his way aright, But the wicked will fall by his own wickedness.
5 بِرُّ الْوَدِيعِ يُقَوِّمُ طَرِيقَهُ، أَمَّا الْمُنَافِقُ فَيَسْقُطُ بِنِفَاقِهِ.
6 The righteousness of the upright will deliver them, But the unfaithful will be caught by their lust.
6 بِرُّ الْمُسْتَقِيمِينَ يُنْقِذُهُمْ، أَمَّا الْغَادِرُونَ فَيُؤْخَذُونَ بِفَسَادِهِمْ.
7 When a wicked man dies, his expectation will perish, And the hope of the unjust perishes.
7 إِذَا مَاتَ الْإِنْسَانُ الْمُنَافِقُ هَلَكَ مِنْهُ الرَّجَاءُ، وَأَمَلُ الْأَثَمَةِ يَبِيدُ.
8 The righteous is delivered from trouble, And it comes to the wicked instead.
8 الصِّدِّيقُ يَتَخَلَّصُ مِنَ الضِّيقِ، وَالْمُنَافِقُ يَحُلُّ مَكَانَهُ.
9 The hypocrite with his mouth destroys his neighbor, But through knowledge the righteous will be delivered.
9 بِالْفَمِ يَخْدَعُ الْمُنَافِقُ قَرِيَبَهُ، وَبِالْمَعْرِفَةِ يَنْجُو الصِّدِّيقُونَ.
10 When it goes well with the righteous, the city rejoices; And when the wicked perish, there is jubilation.
10 بِخَيْرِ الصِّدِّيقِينَ تَفْرَحُ الْمَدِينَةُ، وَعِنْدَ هَلَاكِ الْأَشْرَارِ اِبْتِهَاجٌ.
11 By the blessing of the upright the city is exalted, But it is overthrown by the mouth of the wicked.
11 بِبَرَكَةِ الْمُسْتَقِيمِينَ تَعْلُو الْمَدِينَةُ وَبِفَمِ الأَشْرَارِ تُهْدَمُ.
12 He who is devoid of wisdom despises his neighbor, But a man of understanding holds his peace.
12 بِبَرَكَةِ الْمُسْتَقِيمِينَ يَعْلُو شَأْنُ الْمَدِينَةِ، وَبِأَفْوَاهِ الْمُنَافِقِينَ تَنْقَلِبُ.
13 A talebearer reveals secrets, But he who is of a faithful spirit conceals a matter.
13 الْمُحْتَقِرُ صَاحِبَهُ هُوَ نَاقِصُ الْفَهْمِ، أَمَّا ذُو الْفِطْنَةِ فَيَسْكُتُ. السَّاعِي بِالْوِشَايَةِ يُفْشِي السِّرَّ، وَالْأَمِينُ الرُّوحِ يَكْتُمُ الْأَمْرَ.
Glory be to the Holy Trinity, our God, forever and unto the ages of all ages. Amen.
Ⲟⲩⲱ̀ⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ϯⲧ̀ⲣⲓⲁⲥ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ Ⲡⲉⲛⲛⲟⲩϯ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛⲉⲙ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲛⲓⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲧⲏⲣⲟⲩ: ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ.
مجداً للثالوث القدوس إلهنا الى أبد الآبدين كلها آمين.
	Isaiah 58:1-11
(اشعياء 58: 1-11)
A reading from Isaiah, the prophet. May his holy blessings be with us. Amen.
Ⲉⲃⲟⲗϧⲉⲛ Ⲏⲥⲁⲏ̀ⲁⲥ ⲡⲓⲡ̀ⲣⲟⲫⲏⲧⲏⲥ: ⲉ̀ⲣⲉⲡⲉϥⲥ̀ⲙⲟⲩ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ ϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲛⲉⲙⲁⲛ ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ ⲉϥϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ:
من اشعياء النبي بركته المقدسة تكون معنا. آمين.
1 “Cry aloud, spare not; Lift up your voice like a trumpet; Tell My people their transgression, And the house of Jacob their sins.
1 اُصْرُخْ بِقُوَّةٍ. وَلَا تُشْفِقْ. اِرْفَعْ صَوْتَكَ مِثْلَ بُوقٍ، أَخْبِرْ شَعْبِي بِخَطَايَاهُمْ، وَبَيْتَ يَعْقُوبَ بِذُنُوبِهِمْ.
2 Yet they seek Me daily, And delight to know My ways, As a nation that did righteousness, And did not forsake the ordinance of their God. They ask of Me the ordinances of justice; They take delight in approaching God.
2 يَطْلُبُونَنِي يَوْمًا فَيَوْمًا، وَيَشْتَهُونَ أَنْ يَعْرِفُوا طُرُقِي مِثْلَ شَعْبٍ يَصْنَعُ الْعَدْلَ، وَلَمْ يَتْرُكْ حُكْمَ إِلَهِهِ. يَسْأَلُونَنِي الْآنَ حُكْمًا عَادِلًا. وَيَشْتَهُونَ أَنْ يَقْتَرِبُوا إِلَى اللَّهِ.
3 ‘Why have we fasted,’ they say, ‘and You have not seen? Why have we afflicted our souls, and You take no notice?’ “In fact, in the day of your fast you find pleasure, And exploit all your laborers.
3 قَائِلِينَ: لِمَاذَا صُمْنَا وَلَمْ تَنْظُرْنَا، وَأَذْلَلْنَا أَنْفُسَنَا وَلَمْ تَعْلَمْ؟ لِأَنَّهُ فِي أَيَّامِ صَوْمِكُمْ تَجِدُونَ مَسَرَّتَكُمْ، وَتُثَقِّلُونَ عَلَى مَنْ هُمْ تَحْتَ سُلْطَانِكُمْ.
4 Indeed you fast for strife and debate, And to strike with the fist of wickedness. You will not fast as you do this day, To make your voice heard on high.
4 وَتَصُومُونَ لِلْمُنَازَعَاتِ وَالْمُخَاصَمَاتِ، وَتَضْرِبُونَ الذَّلِيلَ. لِمَاذَا تَصُومُونَ لِي مِثْلَ الْيَوْمِ لِأَسْمَعَ صَوْتَكُمْ بِصُرَاخٍ؟
5 Is it a fast that I have chosen, A day for a man to afflict his soul? Is it to bow down his head like a bulrush, And to spread out sackcloth and ashes? Would you call this a fast, And an acceptable day to the Lord?
5 لَسْتُ أَخْتَارُ أَنَا هَذَا الصَّوْمَ، وَلَا يَوْمًا يُذِلُّ الْإِنْسَانُ نَفْسَهُ. وَلَو إِنَّكَ أَحْنَيْتَ عُنُقَكَ مِثْلَ الطَّوْقِ، وَتَفْرِشُ مِسْحًا وَرَمَادًا تَحْتَكَ، أَتَدْعُونَ هَذَا صَوْمًا مَقْبُولًا،
6 “Is this not the fast that I have chosen: To loose the bonds of wickedness, To undo the heavy burdens, To let the oppressed go free, And that you break every yoke?
6 لَيْسَ هَذَا الصَّوْمُ أَنَا اخْتَرْتُهُ قَالَ الرَّبُّ. لَكِنْ حُلَّ كُلَّ رُبُطِ الظُّلْمِ، فُكَّ صُكُوكَ الظُّلْمِ، وَأَرْسِلِ الْمَسْحُوقِينَ بِمَغْفِرَةٍ. أَرسِلْ لِلْمُنْكَسِرِينَ بِالْإِطْلَاقِ، وَخَزِّقْ كُلَّ مَكْتُوبٍ ظَالِمٍ.
7 Is it not to share your bread with the hungry, And that you bring to your house the poor who are cast out; When you see the naked, that you cover him, And not hide yourself from your own flesh?
7 اِكْسِرْ خُبْزَكَ لِلْجَائِعِ، أَدْخِلِ الْمَسَاكِينَ الَّذِينَ لَا مَأْوَى لَهُمْ إِلَى بَيْتِكَ. إِنْ رَأَيْتَ عُرْيَانًا فَاكْسِهِ، وَقَرِيبُكَ لَا تَتَغَافَلْ عَنْهُ.
8 Then your light shall break forth like the morning, Your healing shall spring forth speedily, And your righteousness shall go before you; The glory of the Lord shall be your rear guard.
8 حِينَئِذٍ يَنْفَجِرُ نُورُكَ مِثْلَ الصُّبْحِ، وَأَشْفِيَتُكَ تُشُرِقُ سَرِيعًا، وَيَتَقَدَّمُ عَدْلُكَ قُدَّامَكَ، وَمَجْدُ اللَّهِ يُجَلِّلُكَ.
9 Then you shall call, and the Lord will answer; You shall cry, and He will say, ‘Here I am.’ “If you take away the yoke from your midst, The pointing of the finger, and speaking wickedness,
9 حِينَئِذٍ تَصْرُخُ وَاللَّهُ يَسْمَعُكَ، وَإِذْ تَتَكَلَّمُ يَقُولُ: هَأَنَذَا. وَإِنْ نَزَعْتَ عَنْكَ الرِّبَاطَ وَالْمَشُورَةَ الرَّدِيَّةَ وَكَلِمَةَ التَّمَرُّدِ،
10 If you extend your soul to the hungry And satisfy the afflicted soul, Then your light shall dawn in the darkness, And your darkness shall be as the noonday.
10 وَتُعْطِي لِلْجَائِعِ خُبْزَكَ مِنْ كُلِّ قَلْبِكَ، وَتُشْبِعِ النَّفْسَ الذَّلِيلَةَ، فَحِينَئِذٍ يُشْرِقُ نُورُكَ فِي الظُّلْمَةِ، وَتَصِيرُ ظُلْمَتُكَ مِثْلَ الظَّهِيرَةِ.
11 The Lord will guide you continually, And satisfy your soul in drought, And strengthen your bones; You shall be like a watered garden, And like a spring of water, whose waters do not fail.
11 وَيَكُونُ إِلَهُكَ مَعَكَ كُلَّ حِينٍ، وَتَمْتَلِئُ كَمَا تَشْتَهِي نَفْسُكَ فِي الْأَرْضِ الْقَاحِلَةِ، وَيُقَوِّي عِظَامَكَ فَتَكُونُ كَجَنَّةٍ رَيَّا وَكَنَبْعِ مِيَاهٍ لَا تَنْقَطِعُ.
Glory be to the Holy Trinity, our God, forever and unto the ages of all ages. Amen.
Ⲟⲩⲱ̀ⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ϯⲧ̀ⲣⲓⲁⲥ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ Ⲡⲉⲛⲛⲟⲩϯ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛⲉⲙ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲛⲓⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲧⲏⲣⲟⲩ: ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ.
مجداً للثالوث القدوس إلهنا الى أبد الآبدين كلها آمين.
	Job 40:6-41:34
(ايوب 40: 6-41: 34)
A reading from Job the righteous. May his holy blessings be with us. Amen.
Ⲉⲃⲟⲗϧⲉⲛ Ⲓⲱⲃ Ⲡⲓⲑ̀ⲙⲏⲓ: ⲉ̀ⲣⲉⲡⲉϥⲥ̀ⲙⲟⲩ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ ϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲛⲉⲙⲁⲛ ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ ⲉϥϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ:
من ايوب الصديق بركته المقدسة تكون معنا. آمين.
6 Then the Lord answered Job out of the whirlwind, and said:
6 فَأَجَابَ الرَّبُّ أَيُّوبَ مِنَ الْعَاصِفَةِ، وَقَالَ:
7 “Now prepare yourself like a man; I will question you, and you shall answer Me:
7 اُشْدُدْ حَقَوَيْكَ وَكُنْ رَجُلًا. إِنِّي سَائِلُكَ فَأَخْبِرِنِي.
8 “Would you indeed annul My judgment? Would you condemn Me that you may be justified?
8 أَلَعَلَّكَ تَنْقُضُ حُكْمِي؟ أَتَسْتَذْنِبُنِي لِتُبَرِّرَ نَفْسَكَ؟
9 Have you an arm like God? Or can you thunder with a voice like His?
9 أَلَكَ مِثْلُ ذِرَاعِ اللَّهِ؟ أَتُرْعِدُ بِمِثْلِ صَوْتِهِ؟
10 Then adorn yourself with majesty and splendor, And array yourself with glory and beauty.
10 إِذًا فَتَزَيَّنِ الْآنَ بِالْعَظَمَةِ وَالْجَلَالِ، وَالْبَسِ الْمَجْدَ وَالْبَهَاءَ.
11 Disperse the rage of your wrath; Look on everyone who is proud, and humble him.
11 صُبَّ فُيُوضَ غَضَبِكَ، وَانْظُرْ إِلَى كُلِّ مُتَعَظِّمٍ وَأَخْفِضْهُ.
12 Look on everyone who is proud, and bring him low; Tread down the wicked in their place.
12 اُنْظُرْ إِلَى كُلِّ مُتَعَظِّمٍ وَذَلِّلْهُ، وَاسْحَقِ الْمُنَافِقِينَ فِي مَوَاضِعِهِمْ.
13 Hide them in the dust together, Bind their faces in hidden darkness.
13 اِطْمِرْهُمْ فِي التُّرَابِ جَمِيعًا، وَاحْبِسْ وُجُوهَهُمْ فِي الْحُفْرَةِ.
14 Then I will also confess to you That your own right hand can save you.
14 حِينَئِذٍ أَمْدَحُكَ أَنَا أَيْضًا لِأَنَّ يَمِينَكَ تُخَلِّصُكَ.
15 “Look now at the behemoth, which I made along with you; He eats grass like an ox.
15 أَنْظُرْ إِلَى بَهِيمُوتَ الَّذِي صَنَعْتُهُ مَعَكَ. إِنَّهُ يَأْكُلُ الْعُشْبَ مِثْلَ الْبَقَرِ.
16 See now, his strength is in his hips, And his power is in his stomach muscles.
16 هَا هِيَ قُوَّتُهُ فِي مَتْنَيْهِ، وَشِدَّتُهُ فِي عَضَلِ بَطْنِهِ.
17 He moves his tail like a cedar; The sinews of his thighs are tightly knit.
17 يَرْفَعُ ذَنَبَهُ كَالأَرْزِ. وَأَعْصَابُ فَخْذَيْهِ مَحْبُوكَةٌ.
18 His bones are like beams of bronze, His ribs like bars of iron.
18 عِظَامُهُ قَصَبٌ مِنْ نُحَاسٍ، وَغَضَارِيفُهُ حَدِيدٌ مُطَرَّقٌ.
19 He is the first of the ways of God; Only He who made him can bring near His sword.
19 هُوَ أَوَّلُ طُرُقِ اللَّهِ فِي الْخَلْقِ وَصَانِعُهُ يُعْمِلُ سَيْفَهُ فِيهِ.
20 Surely the mountains yield food for him, And all the beasts of the field play there.
20 فَالْجِبَالُ تُخْرِجُ لَهُ الْمَرْعَى، وَحَوْلَهُ تَلْعَبُ جَمِيعُ وُحُوشِ الصَّحْرَاءِ.
21 He lies under the lotus trees, In a covert of reeds and marsh.
21 يَرْبِضُ تَحْتَ السِّدْرِ فِي خَمْرِ الْقَصَبِ فِي الْمُسْتَنْقَعِ
22 The lotus trees cover him with their shade; The willows by the brook surround him.
22 وَيُخَيِّمُ عَلَيْهِ السِّدْرُ بِظِلِّهِ. وَيَكْتَنِفُهُ صَفْصَافُ الْوَادِي.
23 Indeed the river may rage, Yet he is not disturbed; He is confident, though the Jordan gushes into his mouth,
23 إِنْ طَغَى عَلَيْهِ النَّهْرُ لَا يَجْفَلُ. هُوَ مُطْمَئِنٌّ وَلَوْ انْدَفَقَ الْأُرْدُنُّ فِي فَمِهِ.
24 Though he takes it in his eyes, Or one pierces his nose with a snare.
24 لَكِنْ مَنْ يَصْطَادُهُ مُوَاجَهَةً وَيَثْقُبُ أَنْفَهُ بِخِزَامَةٍ؟
1 “Can you draw out Leviathan with a hook, Or snare his tongue with a line which you lower?
1 أَمَا لَوِيَاثَانُ أَتَصْطَادُهُ بِشِصٍّ، أَمْ تَرْبِطُ لِسَانَهُ بِحَبْلٍ؟
2 Can you put a reed through his nose, Or pierce his jaw with a hook?
2 أَتَضَعُ فِي أَنْفِهِ أَسَلَةً، أَمْ تَثْقُبُ فَكَّهُ بِخِزَامَةٍ؟
3 Will he make many supplications to you? Will he speak softly to you?
3 أَيُكْثِرُ إِلَيْكَ مِنَ التَّضَرُّعَاتِ، أَمْ يُخَاطِبُكَ بِالاِسْتِعْطَافِ؟
4 Will he make a covenant with you? Will you take him as a servant forever?
4 أَيَقْطَعُ مَعَكَ عَهْدًا فَتَتَّخِذَهُ لَكَ عَبْدًا مُؤَبَّدًا؟
5 Will you play with him as with a bird, Or will you leash him for your maidens?
5 أَتُلَاعِبُهُ كَالْعُصْفُورِ، وَتَأْسِرُهُ لُعْبَةً لِجَواريِكَ؟
6 Will your companions make a banquet of him? Will they apportion him among the merchants?
6 أَيَحْفُرُ لَهُ جَمَاعَةُ الصَّيَّادِينَ حُفْرَةً، وَيُوَزِّعُونَهُ عَلَى تُجَّارِ الْكَنْعَانِيِّينَ؟
7 Can you fill his skin with harpoons, Or his head with fishing spears?
7 أَتُثْخِنُ جِلْدَهُ بِالْأَسِنَّةِ وَرَأْسَهُ بِكَلَالِيبِ الْحُوتِ؟
8 Lay your hand on him; Remember the battle— Never do it again!
8 ضَعْ يَدَكَ عَلَيْهِ. وَاذْكُرِ الْقِتَالَ وَلَا تَعُدْ.
9 Indeed, any hope of overcoming him is false; Shall one not be overwhelmed at the sight of him?
9 لَقَدْ كَذَّبَ أَمَلَ صَيَّادِهِ، فَإِنَّ مُجَرَّدَ مَنْظَرِهِ يَصْرَعُهُ.
10 No one is so fierce that he would dare stir him up. Who then is able to stand against Me?
10 لَيْسَ لِأَحَدٍ جُرْأَةٌ أَنْ يُثِيرَهُ، فَمَنِ الَّذِي يَقِفُ أَمَامَ وَجْهِي؟
11 Who has preceded Me, that I should pay him? Everything under heaven is Mine.
11 مَنْ تَقَدَّمَنِي بِنِعْمَةٍ فَأُوفِيَ لَهُ؟ وَكُلُّ مَا تَحْتَ السَّمَاوَاتِ هُوَ لِي.
12 “I will not conceal his limbs, His mighty power, or his graceful proportions.
12 إِنِّي لَا أَسْكُتُ عَنْ وَصْفِ أَعْضَائِهِ، وَقُوَّتِهَا وَحُسْنِ نِظَامِهَا.
13 Who can remove his outer coat? Who can approach him with a double bridle?
13 مَنْ يَكْشِفُ طَرَفَ لِبَاسِهِ، وَمَنْ يَدْخُلُ بَيْنَ صَفَّي أَضْرَاسِهِ؟
14 Who can open the doors of his face, With his terrible teeth all around?
14 مَنْ يَفْتَحُ مِصْرَاعَي وَجْهِهِ؟ إِنَّ دَائِرَةَ أَسْنَانِهِ هَائِلَةٌ.
15 His rows of scales are his pride, Shut up tightly as with a seal;
15 جِسْمُهُ كَصَفَائِحِ الْمَجَانِّ. كَأَنَّهُ مُخْتَمٌ تَحْتَ حَرَاشِفَ مُلَزَّزَةٍ.
16 One is so near another That no air can come between them;
16 تَتَضَامُّ بَعْضُهَا إِلَى بَعْضٍ، فَلَا تَسْلُكُ بَيْنَهَا الرِّيحُ.
17 They are joined one to another, They stick together and cannot be parted.
17 كُلٌّ مِنْهَا مُلْتَصِقَةٌ بِالْأُخْرَى، فَهِيَ مُتَمَاسِكَةٌ لَا تَنْفَصِلُ.
18 His sneezings flash forth light, And his eyes are like the eyelids of the morning.
18 عُطَاسُهُ يَقْدَحُ النَّورَ، وَعَيْنَاهُ كَأَجْفَانِ الْفَجْرِ.
19 Out of his mouth go burning lights; Sparks of fire shoot out.
19 تَخْرُجُ مِنْ فِيهِ مَشَاعِلُ. وَيَتَطَايَرُ مِنْهُ شَرَرُ النَّارِ.
20 Smoke goes out of his nostrils, As from a boiling pot and burning rushes.
20 وَمِنْ مِنْخَرَيْهِ يَنْبَعِثُ دُخَانٌ كَأَنَّهُ مِنْ قِدْرٍ تَغْلِي أَوْ مِرْجَلٍ.
21 His breath kindles coals, And a flame goes out of his mouth.
21 نَفَسُهُ يُضْرِمُ الْجَمْرَ، وَمِنْ فِيهِ يَخْرُجُ لَهِيبٌ.
22 Strength dwells in his neck, And sorrow dances before him.
22 فِي عُنُقِهِ تَبِيتُ الْقُوَّةُ، وَأَمَامَهُ يَعْدُو الْهَوْلُ.
23 The folds of his flesh are joined together; They are firm on him and cannot be moved.
23 مَطَاوِي لَحْمِهِ مُتَلَاصِقَةٌ مَسْبُوكَةٌ عَلَيْهِ لَا تَتَزَحْزَحُ.
24 His heart is as hard as stone, Even as hard as the lower millstone.
24 قَلْبُهُ صُلْبٌ كَالْحَجَرِ، وَقَاسٍ كَالرَّحَى السُّفْلَى.
25 When he raises himself up, the mighty are afraid; Because of his crashings they are beside themselves.
25 عِنْدَ نُهُوضِهِ يَرْتَاعُ الْأَبْطَالُ. وَمِنَ الذُّعْرِ يَتَحَيَّرُونَ.
26 Though the sword reaches him, it cannot avail; Nor does spear, dart, or javelin.
26 سَيْفُ رَاهِقِهِ لَا يَثْبُتُ، وَلَا الرُّمْحُ وَلَا الْمِزْرَاقُ وَلَا الدِّرْعُ.
27 He regards iron as straw, And bronze as rotten wood.
27 يَحْسَبُ الْحَدِيدَ كَالتِّبْنِ، وَالنُّحَاسَ كَالْعُودِ النَّخِرِ.
28 The arrow cannot make him flee; Slingstones become like stubble to him.
28 لَا يَسْتَفِزُّهُ صَاحِبُ الْقَوْسِ. وَحِجَارَةُ الْمِقْلَاعِ عِنْدَهُ كَالْعُصَافَةِ.
29 Darts are regarded as straw; He laughs at the threat of javelins.
29 يَحْسَبُ الْمِقْمَعَةَ كَالْعُصَافَةِ، وَيَضْحَكُ عَلَى حَفِيفِ الْحَرْبَةِ.
30 His undersides are like sharp potsherds; He spreads pointed marks in the mire.
30 مِنْ تَحْتِهِ شَقْفٌ مُحَدَّدٌ. يَضْطَجِعُ عَلَى الذَّهَبِ كَأَنَّهُ عَلَى طِينٍ.
31 He makes the deep boil like a pot; He makes the sea like a pot of ointment.
31 يُغْلِي اللُّجَّةَ كَالْمِرْجَلِ، وَالْبَحْرَ مِثْلَ قِدْرِ الطِّيبِ.
32 He leaves a shining wake behind him; One would think the deep had white hair.
32 يَخُطُّ وَرَاءَهُ سَبِيلًا لَامِعًا فَيُحْسَبُ الْغَمْرُ شَعْرًا أَشْيَبَ.
33 On earth there is nothing like him, Which is made without fear.
33 لَيْسَ لَهُ فِي الْغَبْرَاءِ نَظِيرٌ. وَقَدْ طُبِعَ عَلَى عَدَمِ الْخَوْفِ.
34 He beholds every high thing; He is king over all the children of pride.”
34 يُسَدِّدُ نَظَرَهُ إِلَى كُلِّ مُتَعَالٍ. وَهُوَ مَلِكٌ عَلَى جَمِيعِ بَنِي الْكِبْرِيَاءِ.
Glory be to the Holy Trinity, our God, forever and unto the ages of all ages. Amen.
Ⲟⲩⲱ̀ⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ϯⲧ̀ⲣⲓⲁⲥ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ Ⲡⲉⲛⲛⲟⲩϯ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛⲉⲙ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲛⲓⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲧⲏⲣⲟⲩ: ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ.
مجداً للثالوث القدوس إلهنا الى أبد الآبدين كلها آمين.