Stand in the fear of God and listen to the Holy Gospel. A reading from the Gospel according to our teacher Saint Mark the Evangelist, and the pure disciple. May his blessings be with us all.
قِفُوا بِخَوْفِ اللهِ، وَأَنْصِتُوا لِسَمَاعِ الإِنْجِيلِ الْمُقَدَّسِ. فَصْلٌ مِنْ بِشَارَةِ الإِنْجِيلِ لِمُعَلِّمِنَا مَارْ مرقس الْبَشِيرِ، التِّلْمِيذِ الطَّاهِرِ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
From the Psalms of our teacher David the prophet. May his blessings be with us all.
مِنْ مَزَامِيرِ تَرَاتِيلِ مُعَلِّمِنَا دَاوُدَ النَّبِيِّ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
Matins Psalm
المزمور
	Psalms 39:10
(مزامير 39: 10)
But You, O Lord, remove not Your compassion far from me; Your mercy and Your truth have helped me continually.
Ⲛ̀ⲑⲟⲕ ⲇⲉ Ⲡⲟ︦ⲥ︦ ⲡⲁⲛⲟⲩϯ: ⲙ̀ⲡⲉⲛⲑ̀ⲣⲟⲩⲟⲩⲉⲓ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲓ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲛⲉⲕⲙⲉⲧϣⲉⲛϩⲏⲧ: ⲡⲉⲕⲛⲁⲓ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲧⲉⲕⲙⲉⲑⲙⲏⲓ: ⲡⲉⲧⲁⲩϣⲟⲡⲧ ⲉ̀ⲣⲱⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ⲥⲏⲟⲩ ⲛⲓⲃⲉⲛ: ⲁ︦ⲗ︦.
وَأَنْتَ أَيُّهَا الرَّبُّ إِلَهِي، لَا تُبْعِدْ رَأْفَاتِكَ عَنِّي، رَحْمَتُكَ وَبِرُّكَ، هُمَا اللَّذَانِ اقْتَبَلَانِي فِي كُلِّ حِينٍ.
People:
Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
الليلويا.
	Psalm Trailer for the Pope or a Bishop
(Ⲙⲁⲣⲟⲩϭⲁⲥϥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲧ̀ⲉⲕⲕ̀ⲗⲏⲥⲓⲁ̀...)
People:
Amen Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲙⲏⲛ Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
امين الليلويا.
Then the introduction to the Gospel is read.
ثم تقال مقدمة الأنجيل وهي:
Reader:
Blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord. Our Lord, God, Savior and King of us all, Jesus Christ, Son of the living God to whom is glory forever. Amen.
القارﺉُ:
مباركٌ الآتي باسمِ الربِّ إلهِ القواتِ، ربُّنا وإلهُنا ومخلصُنا وملكُنا كلِّنا، يسوعُ المسيحُ، ابنُ اللهِ الحيِّ، الذي لهُ المجدُ إلى الأبدِ. آمين.
Matins Gospel
الإنجيل
	Mark 9:25-29
(مرقس 9: 25-29)
25 When Jesus saw that the people came running together, He rebuked the unclean spirit, saying to it: “Deaf and dumb spirit, I command you, come out of him and enter him no more!”
Ⲉ̀ⲧⲁϥⲛⲁⲩ ⲇⲉ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ Ⲓⲏ︦ⲥ︦ ϫⲉ ⲡⲓⲙⲏϣ ϭⲟϫⲓ ⲁϥⲉⲣⲉ̀ⲡⲓⲧⲓⲙⲁⲛ ⲙ̀ⲡⲓⲡⲛ︦ⲁ︦ ⲛ̀ⲁ̀ⲕⲁⲑⲁⲣⲧⲟⲛ ⲉϥϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ⲛⲁϥ ϫⲉ ⲡⲓⲁⲧⲥⲁϫⲓ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛ̀ⲕⲟⲩⲣ ⲙ̀ⲡⲛ︦ⲁ︦ ⲁ̀ⲛⲟⲕ ⲡⲉ ϯⲟⲩⲁϩⲥⲁϩⲛⲓ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲕ ⲁ̀ⲙⲟⲩ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ⲛ̀ϧⲏⲧϥ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉⲣϣⲉ ϫⲉ ⲉ̀ϧⲟⲩⲛ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟϥ.
25 فَلَمَّا رَأَى يَسُوعُ أَنَّ الْجَمْعَ يَتَرَاكَضُونَ، اِنْتَهَرَ الرُّوحَ النَّجِسَ قَائِلًا لَهُ: " أَيُّهَا الرُّوحُ الْأَخْرَسُ الْأَصَمُّ، أَنَا آمُرُكَ: اُخْرُجْ مِنْهُ وَلَا تَدْخُلْهُ أَيْضًا! "
26 Then the spirit cried out, convulsed him greatly, and came out of him. And he became as one dead, so that many said, “He is dead.”
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉ̀ⲧⲁϥⲱϣ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉ̀ⲧⲁϥϣ̀ⲧⲉⲣⲑⲱⲣϥ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩⲙⲏϣ ⲁϥⲓ̀ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁϥⲉⲣ ⲙ̀ⲫ̀ⲣⲏϯ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩⲣⲉϥⲙⲱⲟⲩⲧ ϩⲱⲥⲧⲉ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲟⲩⲙⲏϣ ϫⲟⲥ ϫⲉ ⲁϥⲙⲟⲩ.
26 فَصَرَخَ وَصَرَعَهُ كَثِيرًا وَخَرَجَ. فَصَارَ كَمَيْتٍ، حَتَّى قَالَ كَثِيرُونَ: " إِنَّهُ مَاتَ ".
27 But Jesus took him by the hand and lifted him up, and he arose.
Ⲓⲏ︦ⲥ︦ ⲇⲉ ⲁϥⲁ̀ⲙⲟⲛⲓ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉϥϫⲓϫ ⲁϥⲧⲟⲩⲛⲟⲥϥ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁϥⲧⲱⲛϥ.
27 فَأَمْسَكَهُ يَسُوعُ بِيَدِهِ وَأَنْهَضَهُ، فَقَامَ.
28 And when He had come into the house, His disciples asked Him privately, “Why could we not cast it out?”
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁϥϣⲉⲛⲁϥ ⲉ̀ϧⲟⲩⲛ ⲉ̀ⲡⲉϥⲏⲓ ⲁ̀ ⲛⲉϥⲙⲁⲑⲏⲧⲏⲥ ⲇⲉ ϣⲉⲛϥ ⲥⲁⲡ̀ⲥⲁ ϫⲉ ⲉⲑⲃⲉⲟⲩ ⲁ̀ⲛⲟⲛ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉⲛϣ̀ϫⲉⲙϫⲟⲙ ⲛ̀ϩⲓⲧϥ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ.
28 وَلَمَّا دَخَلَ إِلَى بَيْتِهِ سَأَلَهُ تَلَامِيذُهُ عَلَى اِنْفِرَادٍ: " لِمَاذَا لَمْ نَسْتَطِعْ نَحْنُ أَنْ نُخْرِجَهُ؟ "
29 So He said to them, “This kind can come out by nothing but prayer and fasting.”
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ⲛⲱⲟⲩ ϫⲉ ⲡⲁⲓⲅⲉⲛⲟⲥ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲛϣ̀ϫⲟⲙ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉϥⲓ̀ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ϧⲉⲛ ϩ̀ⲗⲓ ⲉ̀ⲃⲏⲗ ϧⲉⲛ ⲟⲩⲡⲣⲟⲥⲉⲩⲭⲏ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲟⲩⲛⲏⲥⲧⲓⲁ̀.
29 فَقَالَ لَهُمْ: " إِنَّ هَذَا الْجِنْسَ لَا يُمْكِنُ أَنْ يَخْرُجَ بِشَيْءٍ إِلَّا بِالصَّلَاةِ وَالصَّوْمِ ".