Stand in the fear of God and listen to the Holy Gospel. A reading from the Gospel according to our teacher Saint Mark the Evangelist, and the pure disciple. May his blessings be with us all.
قِفُوا بِخَوْفِ اللهِ، وَأَنْصِتُوا لِسَمَاعِ الإِنْجِيلِ الْمُقَدَّسِ. فَصْلٌ مِنْ بِشَارَةِ الإِنْجِيلِ لِمُعَلِّمِنَا مَارْ مرقس الْبَشِيرِ، التِّلْمِيذِ الطَّاهِرِ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
From the Psalms of our teacher David the prophet. May his blessings be with us all.
مِنْ مَزَامِيرِ تَرَاتِيلِ مُعَلِّمِنَا دَاوُدَ النَّبِيِّ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
Matins Psalm
المزمور
	Psalms 24:7,10
(مزامير 24: 7,10)
According to Your mercy remember me, For Your goodness' sake, O Lord. Good and upright is the Lord. For Your name's sake, O Lord, Pardon my iniquity, for it is great.
Ⲕⲁⲧⲁ ⲡⲉⲕⲛⲁⲓ ⲛ̀ⲑⲟⲕ ⲁ̀ⲣⲓⲡⲁⲙⲉⲩⲓ̀: ⲉⲑⲃⲉ ⲧⲉⲕⲙⲉⲧ ⲭ︦ⲣ︦ⲥ︦ Ⲡⲟ︦ⲥ︦: ⲟⲩ ⲭ︦ⲣ︦ⲥ︦ ⲉϥⲥⲟⲩⲧⲱⲛ ⲡⲉ Ⲡⲟ︦ⲥ︦: ⲉⲑⲃⲉ ⲡⲉⲕⲣⲁⲛ Ⲡⲟ︦ⲥ︦ ⲉⲕⲉ̀ⲭⲁ ⲡⲁⲛⲟⲃⲓ ⲛⲏⲓ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ϫⲉ ϥ̀ⲟϣ ⲅⲁⲣ: ⲁ︦ⲗ︦.
حَسَبَ رحْمَتِكَ اذْكُرنِي أَنْتَ، مِنْ أَجْلِ صَلَاحِكَ يَا رَبُّ، لِأَنَّهُ صَالحٌ ومُسْتَقيمٌ هُوَ الرَّبُّ. مِنْ أَجْلِ اسْمِكَ يَا رَبُّ تَغْفِرُ لِي خَطِيَّتِى لِأَنَّهَا كَثِيرَةٌ.
People:
Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
الليلويا.
	Psalm Trailer for the Pope or a Bishop
(Ⲙⲁⲣⲟⲩϭⲁⲥϥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲧ̀ⲉⲕⲕ̀ⲗⲏⲥⲓⲁ̀...)
People:
Amen Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲙⲏⲛ Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
امين الليلويا.
Then the introduction to the Gospel is read.
ثم تقال مقدمة الأنجيل وهي:
Reader:
Blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord. Our Lord, God, Savior and King of us all, Jesus Christ, Son of the living God to whom is glory forever. Amen.
القارﺉُ:
مباركٌ الآتي باسمِ الربِّ إلهِ القواتِ، ربُّنا وإلهُنا ومخلصُنا وملكُنا كلِّنا، يسوعُ المسيحُ، ابنُ اللهِ الحيِّ، الذي لهُ المجدُ إلى الأبدِ. آمين.
Matins Gospel
الإنجيل
	Mark 9:43-50
(مرقس 9: 43-50)
43 If your hand causes you to sin, cut it off. It is better for you to enter into life maimed, rather than having two hands, to go to hell, into the fire that shall never be quenched—
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉ̀ϣⲱⲡ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲧⲉⲕϫⲓϫ ⲉⲣⲥ̀ⲕⲁⲛⲇⲁⲗⲓⲍⲉⲥⲑⲉ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲕ ϫⲟϫⲥ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ⲛⲁⲛⲉⲥ ⲅⲁⲣ ⲛⲁⲕ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉⲕⲓ̀ ⲉ̀ϧⲟⲩⲛ ⲉ̀ⲡⲓⲱⲛϧ ⲉⲕⲟⲓ ⲛ̀ϫⲁϭⲏ ⲓⲉ ⲉ̀ⲣⲉ ϫⲓϫ ⲃ︦ϯ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟⲕ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉⲕϣⲉ ⲉ̀ϯⲅⲉⲉⲛⲛⲁ ⲉ̀ⲡⲓⲭ̀ⲣⲱⲙ ⲛ̀ⲁⲧϭⲉⲛⲟ.
43 فَإِنْ أَعْثَرَتْكَ يَدُكَ فَاقْطَعْهَا. فَخَيْرٌ لَكَ أَنْ تَدْخُلَ الْحَيَاةَ وَأَنْتَ أَقْطَعُ مِنْ أَنْ يَكُونَ لَكَ يَدَانِ وَتَذْهَبُ إِلَى جَهَنَّمَ، إِلَى النَّارِ الَّتِي لَا تُطْفَأُ.
45 And if your foot causes you to sin, cut it off. It is better for you to enter life lame, rather than having two feet, to be cast into hell, into the fire that shall never be quenched—
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉ̀ϣⲱⲡ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲧⲉⲕϭⲁⲗⲟϫ ⲉⲣⲥ̀ⲕⲁⲛⲇⲁⲗⲓⲍⲉⲥⲑⲉ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲕ ϫⲟϫⲥ ϩⲓⲧⲥ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ⲛⲁⲛⲉⲥ ⲛⲁⲕ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉⲕⲓ̀ ⲉ̀ϧⲟⲩⲛ ⲉ̀ⲡⲓⲱⲛϧ ⲉⲕⲟⲓ ⲛ̀ϭⲁⲗⲉ ⲉ̀ϩⲟⲧⲉ ⲉ̀ⲣⲉ ⲟⲩⲟⲛ ϭⲁⲗⲟϫ ⲥ̀ⲛⲟⲩϯ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟⲕ ⲛ̀ⲥⲉϩⲓⲧⲕ ⲉ̀ϯⲅⲉⲉⲛⲛⲁ.
45 وَإِنْ أَعْثَرَتْكَ رِجْلُكَ فَاقْطَعْهَا. فَخَيْرٌ لَكَ أَنْ تَدْخُلَ الْحَيَاةَ وَأَنْتَ أَعْرَجُ مِنْ أَنْ يَكُونَ لَكَ رِجْلَانِ وَتُطْرَحَ فِي جَهَنَّمَ فِي النَّارِ.
47 And if your eye causes you to sin, pluck it out. It is better for you to enter the kingdom of God with one eye, rather than having two eyes, to be cast into hell fire—
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉ̀ϣⲱⲡ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲡⲉⲕⲃⲁⲗ ⲉⲣⲥ̀ⲕⲁⲛⲇⲁⲗⲓⲍⲉⲥⲑⲉ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲕ ⲫⲟⲣⲕϥ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ⲛⲁⲛⲉⲥ ⲛⲁⲕ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉⲕⲓ̀ ⲉ̀ϧⲟⲩⲛ ⲉ̀ϯⲙⲉⲧⲟⲩⲣⲟ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ Ⲫϯ ⲉ̀ⲟⲩⲃⲁⲗ ⲙ̀ⲙⲁⲩⲁⲧϥ ⲉ̀ⲧⲉⲣⲟⲕ ⲉ̀ϩⲟⲧⲉ ⲉ̀ⲟⲩⲟⲛ ⲃⲁⲗ ⲃ︦ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲕ ⲛ̀ⲥⲉϩⲓⲧⲕ ⲉ̀ϯⲅⲉⲉⲛⲛⲁ.
47 وَإِنْ أَعْثَرَتْكَ عَيْنُكَ فَاقْلَعْهَا. فَخَيْرٌ لَكَ أَنْ تَدْخُلَ مَلَكُوتَ اللَّهِ وَأَنْتَ أَعْوَرُ مِنْ أَنْ يَكُونَ لَكَ عَيْنَانِ وَتُلْقَى فِي جَهَنَّمَ النَّارِ.
48 where ‘Their worm does not die And the fire is not quenched.’
Ⲡⲓⲙⲁ ⲉ̀ⲧⲉ ⲙ̀ⲡⲁⲣⲉ ⲡⲟⲩϥⲉⲛⲧ ⲙⲟⲩ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲡⲟⲩⲭ̀ⲣⲱⲙ ⲙ̀ⲡⲁϥϭⲉⲛⲟ.
48 حَيْثُ دُودُهُمْ لَا يَمُوتُ وَنَارُهُمْ لَا تُطْفَأُ.
49 “For everyone will be seasoned with fire, and every sacrifice will be seasoned with salt.
Ⲟⲩⲟⲛ ⲅⲁⲣ ⲛⲓⲃⲉⲛ ⲉ̀ϣⲁⲩⲙⲟⲗϩϥ ⲙ̀ⲡⲓⲭ̀ⲣⲱⲙ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ϣⲱⲧ ⲛⲓⲃⲉⲛ ⲉ̀ϣⲁⲩⲙⲟⲩⲗϩϥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲡⲓϩ̀ⲙⲟⲩ.
49 لِأَنَّ كُلَّ وَاحِدٍ يُمَلَّحُ بِالنَّارِ، وَكُلَّ ذَبِيحَةٍ تُمَلَّحُ بِمِلْحٍ.
50 Salt is good, but if the salt loses its flavor, how will you season it? Have salt in yourselves, and have peace with one another.”
Ⲛⲁⲛⲉ ⲡⲓϩ̀ⲙⲟⲩ ⲉ̀ϣⲱⲡ ⲇⲉ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲡⲓϩ̀ⲙⲟⲩ ⲉⲣⲁⲧϩ̀ⲙⲟⲩ ⲉ̀ϣⲁⲩⲙⲟⲗϩϥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲟⲩ ⲙⲁⲣⲉ ϩ̀ⲙⲟⲩ ϣⲱⲡⲓ ϧⲉⲛ ⲑⲏⲛⲟⲩ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁ̀ⲣⲓϩⲓⲣⲏⲛⲏ ϧⲉⲛ ⲛⲉⲧⲉⲛⲉ̀ⲣⲏⲟⲩ.
50 الْمِلْحُ جَيِّدٌ. وَلَكِنْ إِذَا صَارَ الْمِلْحُ بِلَا مُلُوحَةٍ، فَبِمَاذَا تُصْلِحُونَهُ؟ فَلْيَكُنْ فِيكُمْ مِلْحٌ، وَلْيُسَالِمْ بَعْضُكُمْ بَعْضًا.