Stand in the fear of God and listen to the Holy Gospel. A reading from the Gospel according to our teacher Saint Matthew the Evangelist, and the pure disciple. May his blessings be with us all.
قِفُوا بِخَوْفِ اللهِ، وَأَنْصِتُوا لِسَمَاعِ الإِنْجِيلِ الْمُقَدَّسِ. فَصْلٌ مِنْ بِشَارَةِ الإِنْجِيلِ لِمُعَلِّمِنَا مَارْ متى الْبَشِيرِ، التِّلْمِيذِ الطَّاهِرِ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
From the Psalms of our teacher David the prophet. May his blessings be with us all.
مِنْ مَزَامِيرِ تَرَاتِيلِ مُعَلِّمِنَا دَاوُدَ النَّبِيِّ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
Matins Psalm
المزمور
	Psalms 16:1
(مزامير 16: 1)
Hear a just cause, O Lord, Attend to my cry; Give ear to my prayer which is not from deceitful lips.
Ϭⲓⲥ̀ⲙⲏⲙ Ⲫϯ ⲉ̀ⲧⲁⲙⲉⲑⲙⲏⲓ: ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲙⲁϩ̀ⲑⲏⲕ ⲉ̀ⲡⲁϯϩⲟ: ⲭⲁⲙⲁϣϫ ⲉ̀ⲧⲁⲡ̀ⲣⲟⲥⲉⲩⲭⲏ: ϧⲉⲛ ϩⲁⲛⲥ̀ⲫⲟⲧⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ⲭ̀ⲣⲟϥ ⲁⲛ: ⲁ︦ⲗ︦.
اِسْتَمِعْ يَا أللَّهُ عَدْلِي، وَأَصْغِ إِلَى طِلَبَتِي، وَأَنْصِتْ إِلَى صَلَاتِي، فَإِنَّهَا مِنْ شَفَتَيْنِ بِلَا غِشٍّ.
People:
Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
الليلويا.
	Psalm Trailer for the Pope or a Bishop
(Ⲙⲁⲣⲟⲩϭⲁⲥϥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲧ̀ⲉⲕⲕ̀ⲗⲏⲥⲓⲁ̀...)
People:
Amen Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲙⲏⲛ Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
امين الليلويا.
Then the introduction to the Gospel is read.
ثم تقال مقدمة الأنجيل وهي:
Reader:
Blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord. Our Lord, God, Savior and King of us all, Jesus Christ, Son of the living God to whom is glory forever. Amen.
القارﺉُ:
مباركٌ الآتي باسمِ الربِّ إلهِ القواتِ، ربُّنا وإلهُنا ومخلصُنا وملكُنا كلِّنا، يسوعُ المسيحُ، ابنُ اللهِ الحيِّ، الذي لهُ المجدُ إلى الأبدِ. آمين.
Matins Gospel
الإنجيل
	Matthew 21:28-32
(متى 21: 28-32)
28 “But what do you think? A man had two sons, and he came to the first and said, ‘Son, go, work today in my vineyard.’
Ⲟⲩ ⲇⲉ ⲡⲉ ⲧⲉⲧⲉⲛⲙⲉⲩⲓ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟϥ ⲛⲉ ⲟⲩⲟⲛ ⲟⲩⲣⲱⲙⲓ ⲉ̀ⲟⲩⲟⲛⲧⲉϥ ϣⲏⲣⲓ ⲃ︦ ⲙ̀ⲙⲁⲩ ⲁϥⲓ̀ ϩⲁ ⲡⲓϩⲟⲩⲓⲧ ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ⲛⲁϥ ϫⲉ ⲡⲁϣⲏⲣⲓ ⲙⲁϣⲉⲛⲁⲕ ⲙ̀ⲫⲟⲟⲩ ⲁ̀ⲣⲓϩⲱⲃ ϧⲉⲛ ⲡⲁⲓⲁϩⲁ̀ⲗⲟⲗⲓ.
28 " مَاذَا تَظُنُّونَ؟ إِنْسَانٌ كَانَ لَهُ ابْنَانِ، فَدَنَا إِلَى الْأَوَّلِ وَقَالَ: يَا ابْنِي، اِذْهَبِ الْيَوْمَ وَاعْمَلْ فِي كَرْمِي.
29 He answered and said, ‘I will not,’ but afterward he regretted it and went.
Ⲛ̀ⲑⲟϥ ⲇⲉ ⲁϥⲉ̀ⲣⲟⲩⲱ̀ ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ϫⲉ ⲁ̀ⲛⲟⲕ ⲡⲁⲟ︦ⲥ︦ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉϥϣⲉⲛⲁϥ.
29 فَأَجَابَ قَائِلًا: لَا أُرِيدُ وَلَكِنَّهُ أَخِيرًا نَدِمَ وَذَهَبَ.
30 Then he came to the second and said likewise. And he answered and said, ‘I go, sir,’ but he did not go.
Ⲁϥⲓ̀ ϩⲁ ⲡⲓⲙⲁϩⲃ︦ ⲁϥϫⲟⲥ ⲛⲁϥ ⲟⲛ ⲙ̀ⲡⲁⲓⲣⲏϯ ⲛ̀ⲑⲟϥ ⲇⲉ ⲁϥⲉ̀ⲣⲟⲩⲱ̀ ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ϫⲉ ⲛ̀ϯⲟⲩⲱϣ ⲁⲛ ⲉ̀ⲡ̀ϧⲁⲉ̀ ⲇⲉ ⲉ̀ⲧⲁϥⲟⲩⲉⲙϩ̀ⲑⲏϥ ⲁϥϣⲉⲛⲁϥ.
30 وَدَنَا إِلَى الْآخَرِ وَقَالَ لَهُ مِثْلَ ذَلِكَ. فَأَجَابَ قَائِلًا: أَذْهَبُ يَا سَيِّدِي. وَلَمْ يَذْهَبْ.
31 Which of the two did the will of his father?” They said to Him, “The first.” Jesus said to them, “Assuredly, I say to you that tax collectors and harlots enter the kingdom of God before you.
Ⲛⲓⲙ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗϧⲉⲛ ⲡⲓⲃ︦ ⲁϥⲉⲣ ⲡⲉⲧⲉϩⲛⲉ ⲡⲉϥⲓⲱⲧ ⲡⲉϫⲱⲟⲩ ϫⲉ ⲡⲓϧⲁⲉ̀ ⲡⲉ ⲡⲉϫⲉ Ⲓⲏ︦ⲥ︦ ⲛⲱⲟⲩ ϫⲉ ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ ϯϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ⲛⲱⲧⲉⲛ ϫⲉ ⲡⲓⲧⲉⲗⲱⲛⲏⲥ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲛⲓⲡⲟⲣⲛⲟⲥ ⲥⲉⲛⲁⲉⲣϣⲟⲣⲡ ⲉ̀ⲣⲱⲧⲉⲛ ⲉ̀ϯⲙⲉⲧⲟⲩⲣⲟ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ Ⲫϯ.
31 فَمَنْ مِنْهُمَا فَعَلَ إِرَادَةَ الْأَبِ؟ " فَقَالُوا لَهُ: " الْأَوَّلُ ". فَقَالَ لَهُمْ يَسُوعُ: " الْحَقَّ أَقُولُ لَكُمْ: إِنَّ الْعَشَّارِينَ وَالزُّنَاةَ يَسْبِقُونَكُمْ إِلَى مَلَكُوتِ اللَّهِ،
32 For John came to you in the way of righteousness, and you did not believe him; but tax collectors and harlots believed him; and when you saw it, you did not afterward relent and believe him.
Ⲁϥⲓ̀ ⲅⲁⲣ ϩⲁⲣⲱⲧⲉⲛ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ Ⲓⲱⲁⲛⲛⲏⲥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲫ̀ⲓⲙⲱⲓⲧ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ϯⲙⲉⲑⲙⲏⲓ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉⲧⲉⲛⲛⲁϩϯ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟϥ ⲛⲓⲧⲉⲗⲱⲛⲏⲥ ⲇⲉ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲛⲓⲡⲟⲣⲛⲟⲥ ⲁⲩⲛⲁϩϯ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟϥ ⲛ̀ⲑⲱⲧⲉⲛ ⲇⲉ ⲁ̀ⲣⲉⲧⲉⲛⲛⲁⲩ ⲟⲩⲇⲉ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉⲧⲉⲛⲟⲩⲉⲙ ϩ̀ⲑⲏⲧⲉⲛ ⲉ̀ⲡ̀ϧⲁⲉ̀ ⲉ̀ⲡ̀ϫⲓⲛⲛⲁϩϯ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟϥ.
32 فَإِنَّهُ قَدْ جَاءَكُمْ يُوحَنَّا بِطَرِيقِ الْبِرِّ فَلَمْ تُؤْمِنُوا بِهِ، وَالْعَشَّارُونَ وَالزُّنَاةُ آمَنُوا بِهِ. وَأَنْتُمْ رَأَيْتُمْ ذَلِكَ وَلَمْ تَنْدَمُوا أَخِيرًا لِتُؤْمِنُوا بِهِ ".