Stand in the fear of God and listen to the Holy Gospel. A reading from the Gospel according to our teacher Saint Luke the Evangelist, and the pure disciple. May his blessings be with us all.
قِفُوا بِخَوْفِ اللهِ، وَأَنْصِتُوا لِسَمَاعِ الإِنْجِيلِ الْمُقَدَّسِ. فَصْلٌ مِنْ بِشَارَةِ الإِنْجِيلِ لِمُعَلِّمِنَا مَارْ لوقا الْبَشِيرِ، التِّلْمِيذِ الطَّاهِرِ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
From the Psalms of our teacher David the prophet. May his blessings be with us all.
مِنْ مَزَامِيرِ تَرَاتِيلِ مُعَلِّمِنَا دَاوُدَ النَّبِيِّ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
Liturgy Psalm
المزمور
	Psalms 97:8
(مزامير 97: 8)
Let the hills be joyful together before the Lord, For He is coming to judge the earth. With righteousness He shall judge the world, And the peoples with equity.
Ⲛⲓⲧⲱⲟⲩ ⲉⲩⲉ̀ⲑⲉⲗⲏⲗ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉⲙ̀ⲑⲟ ⲙ̀Ⲡⲟ︦ⲥ︦: ϫⲉ ⲁϥⲓ̀ⲉ̀ϯϩⲁⲡ ⲉ̀ⲡ̀ⲕⲁϩⲓ: ϥ̀ⲛⲁϯϩⲁⲡ ⲉ̀ϯⲟⲓⲕⲟⲩⲙⲉⲛⲏ ϧⲉⲛ ⲟⲩⲙⲉⲑⲙⲏⲓ: ⲛⲉⲙ ϩⲁⲛⲗⲁⲟⲥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲟⲩⲥⲱⲟⲩⲧⲉⲛ: ⲁ︦ⲗ︦.
الْجِبَالُ تَبْتَهِجُ أَمَامَ وَجْهِ الرَّبِّ، لِأَنَّهُ أَتَى لِيَدِينَ الْأَرْضَ، يَدِينُ الْمَسْكُونَةَ بِالْعَدْلِ، وَالشُّعُوبَ بِالاِسْتِقَامَةِ.
People:
Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
الليلويا.
	Psalm Trailer for the Pope or a Bishop
(Ⲙⲁⲣⲟⲩϭⲁⲥϥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲧ̀ⲉⲕⲕ̀ⲗⲏⲥⲓⲁ̀...)
People:
Amen Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲙⲏⲛ Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
امين الليلويا.
Then the introduction to the Gospel is read.
ثم تقال مقدمة الأنجيل وهي:
Reader:
Blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord. Our Lord, God, Savior and King of us all, Jesus Christ, Son of the living God to whom is glory forever. Amen.
القارﺉُ:
مباركٌ الآتي باسمِ الربِّ إلهِ القواتِ، ربُّنا وإلهُنا ومخلصُنا وملكُنا كلِّنا، يسوعُ المسيحُ، ابنُ اللهِ الحيِّ، الذي لهُ المجدُ إلى الأبدِ. آمين.
Liturgy Gospel
الإنجيل
	Luke 13:31-35
(لوقا 13: 31-35)
31 On that very day some Pharisees came, saying to Him, “Get out and depart from here, for Herod wants to kill You.”
Ⲛ̀ϩ̀ⲣⲏⲓ ⲇⲉ ϧⲉⲛ ⲡⲓⲉ̀ϩⲟⲟⲩ ⲉ̀ⲧⲉⲙ̀ⲙⲁⲩ ⲁⲩⲓ̀ ϩⲁⲣⲟϥ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲛⲓⲫⲁⲣⲓⲥⲉⲟⲥ ⲉⲩϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ⲛⲁϥ ϫⲉ ⲙⲁϣⲉ ⲛⲁⲕ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ϩⲱⲗ ⲁⲓ ⲉ ⲣⲱⲇⲏⲥ ⲟⲩⲱϣ ⲉ̀ϧⲟⲑⲃⲉⲕ.
31 وَفِي ذَلِكَ الْيَوْمِ جَاءَ إِلَيْهِ قَوْمٌ مِنَ الْفَرِّيسِيِّينَ وَقَالُوا لَهُ: " اُخْرُجْ وَاذْهَبْ مِنْ هَهُنَا، فَإِنَّ هِيرُودِسَ يُرِيدُ أَنْ يَقْتُلَكَ ".
32 And He said to them, “Go, tell that fox, ‘Behold, I cast out demons and perform cures today and tomorrow, and the third day I shall be perfected.’
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ⲛⲱⲟⲩ ϫⲉ ⲙⲁϣⲉ ⲛⲱⲧⲉⲛ ⲁ̀ϫⲟⲥ ⲛ̀ⲧⲁⲓⲃⲁϣⲟⲣ ϫⲉ ϩⲏⲡⲡⲉ ϯϩⲓ ⲇⲉⲙⲱⲛ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ϫⲱⲕ ⲛ̀ϩⲁⲛⲧⲁⲗϭⲟ ⲙⲫⲟⲟⲩ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲣⲁⲥϯ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ϧⲉⲛ ⲡⲓⲙⲁϩⲅ︦ ϯⲛⲁϫⲱⲕ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ.
32 فَقَالَ لَهُمُ: " اِذْهَبُوا وَقُولُوا لِهَذَا الثَّعْلَبِ: هَا أَنَا أُخْرِجُ الشَّيَاطِينَ، وَأُتَمِّمُ الشِّفَاءَ الْيَوْمَ وَغَدًا، وَفِي الْيَوْمِ الثَّالِثِ أُكَمَّلُ.
33 Nevertheless I must journey today, tomorrow, and the day following; for it cannot be that a prophet should perish outside of Jerusalem.
Ⲡ̀ⲗⲏⲛ ϩⲱϯ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟⲓ ⲛ̀ⲧⲁⲉⲣ ⲫⲟⲟⲩ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲣⲁⲥϯ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲡⲉⲑⲛⲏⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲁϣⲉ ⲏⲓ ⲉ ⲥ̀ⲭⲏ ⲁⲛ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲟⲩⲡ̀ⲣⲟⲫⲏⲧⲏⲥ ⲧⲁⲕⲟ ⲥⲁⲃⲟⲗ ⲛ̀ⲓ̀ⲗ︦ⲏ︦ⲙ︦.
33 وَلَكِنْ يَنْبَغِي لِي أَنْ أُقِيمَ الْيَوْمَ وَغَدًا وَفِي الْآتِي أَذْهَبُ؛ لِأَنَّهُ لَا يَهْلِكُ نَبِيٌّ خَارِجًا عَنْ أُورُشَلِيمَ.
34 “O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, the one who kills the prophets and stones those who are sent to her! How often I wanted to gather your children together, as a hen gathers her brood under her wings, but you were not willing!
Ⲓ̀ⲗ︦ⲏ︦ⲙ︦ ⲓ̀ⲗ︦ⲏ︦ⲙ︦ ⲑⲏ ⲉⲧⲁⲥϧⲱⲧⲉⲃ ⲛ̀ⲛⲓⲡⲣⲟⲫⲏⲧⲏⲥ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉⲧϩⲓ ⲱⲛⲓ ⲉ̀ϫⲉⲛ ⲛⲏⲉⲧⲁⲩⲟⲩⲟⲣⲡⲟⲩ ϩⲁⲣⲟⲥ ⲟⲩⲏⲣ ⲛ̀ⲥⲟⲡ ⲁⲓⲟⲩⲱϣ ⲉ̀ⲑⲟⲩⲉⲧ ⲛⲉϣⲏⲣⲓ ⲙ̀ⲫ̀ⲣⲏϯ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩϩⲁⲗⲏⲧ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉϥⲙⲟϩ ϧⲁ ⲛⲉϥⲧⲉⲛϩ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉⲧⲉⲛⲟⲩⲱϣ.
34 يَا أُورُشَلِيمُ، يَا أُورُشَلِيمُ! يَا قَاتِلَةَ الْأَنْبِيَاءِ وَرَاجِمَةَ الْمُرْسَلِينَ إِلَيْهَا، كَمْ مِنْ مَرَّةٍ أَرَدْتُ أَنْ أَجْمَعَ بَنِيكِ كَمَا يَجْمَعُ الطَّائِرُ فِرَاخَهُ تَحْتَ جَنَاحَيْهِ، فَلَمْ تُرِيدُوا.
35 See! Your house is left to you desolate; and assuredly, I say to you, you shall not see Me until the time comes when you say, ‘Blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord!’ ”
Ϩⲏⲡⲡⲉ ⲓⲥ ⲡⲉⲧⲉⲛⲏⲓ ϥ̀ⲭⲏ ⲛⲱⲧⲉⲛ ϯ ϫⲱ ⲇⲉ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ⲛⲱⲧⲉⲛ ϫⲉ ⲛ̀ⲛⲉⲧⲉⲛⲛⲁⲩ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟⲓ ⲓⲥϫⲉⲛ ϯⲛⲟⲩ ϣⲁⲧⲉⲧⲉⲛϫⲟⲥ ϫⲉ ϥ̀ⲥ̀ⲙⲁⲣⲱⲟⲩⲧ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲡⲉⲑⲛⲏⲟⲩ ϧⲉⲛ ⲫ̀ⲣⲁⲛ ⲙ̀Ⲡⲟ︦ⲥ︦
35 هُوَذَا بَيْتُكُمْ يُتْرَكُ لَكُمْ خَرَابًا! وَإِنِّي أَقُولُ لَكُمْ: إِنَّكُمْ لَا تَرَوْنَنِي مِنَ الْآنَ حَتَّى تَقُولُوا: مُبَارَكٌ الْآتِي بِاسْمِ الرَّبِّ ".