Stand in the fear of God and listen to the Holy Gospel. A reading from the Gospel according to our teacher Saint Mark the Evangelist, and the pure disciple. May his blessings be with us all.
قِفُوا بِخَوْفِ اللهِ، وَأَنْصِتُوا لِسَمَاعِ الإِنْجِيلِ الْمُقَدَّسِ. فَصْلٌ مِنْ بِشَارَةِ الإِنْجِيلِ لِمُعَلِّمِنَا مَارْ مرقس الْبَشِيرِ، التِّلْمِيذِ الطَّاهِرِ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
From the Psalms of our teacher David the prophet. May his blessings be with us all.
مِنْ مَزَامِيرِ تَرَاتِيلِ مُعَلِّمِنَا دَاوُدَ النَّبِيِّ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
Matins Psalm
المزمور
	Psalms 36:34-35
(مزامير 36: 34-35)
But the salvation of the righteous is from the Lord; He is their strength in the time of trouble. And the Lord shall help them and deliver them. And save them, Because they trust in Him.
Ⲫ̀ⲛⲟϩⲉⲙ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲛⲓⲑ̀ⲙⲏⲓ ϥ̀ⲭⲱ ϧⲁⲧⲉⲛ Ⲡⲟ︦ⲥ︦: ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛ̀ⲑⲟϥ ⲡⲉ ⲡⲟⲩⲛⲁϣϯ ϧⲉⲛ ⲡ̀ⲥⲏⲟⲩ ⲙ̀ⲡ̀ϩⲟϫϩⲉϫ: Ⲡⲟ︦ⲥ︦ ⲉϥⲉ̀ⲉⲣⲃⲟⲏ̀ⲑⲓⲛ ⲉ̀ⲣⲱⲟⲩ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉϥⲉ̀ⲛⲁϩⲙⲟⲩ: ⲉϥⲉ̀ⲧⲟⲩϫⲱⲟⲩ ϫⲉ ⲁⲩⲉⲣϩⲉⲗⲡⲓⲥ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟϥ. ⲁ︦ⲗ︦.
خَلَاصُ الصِّدِّيقِينَ مِنْ قِبَلِ الرَّبِّ، وَهُوَ نَاصِرُهُمْ في زَمَانِ الضِّيقِ. الرَّبُّ يُعِينُهُمْ، وَيُنَجِّيهِمْ ويُنْقِذُهُمْ. هَلِّلُويَا.
People:
Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
الليلويا.
	Psalm Trailer for the Pope or a Bishop
(Ⲙⲁⲣⲟⲩϭⲁⲥϥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲧ̀ⲉⲕⲕ̀ⲗⲏⲥⲓⲁ̀...)
People:
Amen Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲙⲏⲛ Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
امين الليلويا.
Then the introduction to the Gospel is read.
ثم تقال مقدمة الأنجيل وهي:
Reader:
Blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord. Our Lord, God, Savior and King of us all, Jesus Christ, Son of the living God to whom is glory forever. Amen.
القارﺉُ:
مباركٌ الآتي باسمِ الربِّ إلهِ القواتِ، ربُّنا وإلهُنا ومخلصُنا وملكُنا كلِّنا، يسوعُ المسيحُ، ابنُ اللهِ الحيِّ، الذي لهُ المجدُ إلى الأبدِ. آمين.
Matins Gospel
الإنجيل
	Mark 13:9-13
(مرقس 13: 9-13)
9 “But watch out for yourselves, for they will deliver you up to councils, and you will be beaten in the synagogues. You will be brought before rulers and kings for My sake, for a testimony to them.
Ⲁ̀ⲛⲁⲩ ⲇⲉ ⲛ̀ⲑⲱⲧⲉⲛ ⲉ̀ⲣⲱⲧⲉⲛ ⲥⲉⲛⲁϯ ⲑⲏⲛⲟⲩ ⲉ̀ϩⲁⲛⲙⲁⲛ̀ϯϩⲁⲡ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ϧⲉⲛ ⲛⲓⲥⲩⲛⲁⲅⲱⲅⲏ ⲥⲉⲛⲁϩⲓⲟⲩⲓ̀ ⲉ̀ⲣⲱⲧⲉⲛ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛⲧⲟⲩⲧⲁϩⲱⲧⲉⲛ ⲉ̀ⲣⲁⲧⲉⲛ ⲑⲏⲛⲟⲩ ⲛⲁϩⲣⲉⲛ ϩⲁⲛϩⲏⲅⲉⲙⲱⲛ ⲛⲉⲙ ϩⲁⲛⲟⲩⲣⲱⲟⲩ ⲉⲑⲃⲏⲧ ⲉⲩⲙⲉⲧⲙⲉⲑⲣⲉ ⲛⲱⲟⲩ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲛⲓⲉⲑⲛⲟⲥ ⲧⲏⲣⲟⲩ.
9 فَانْظُرُوا إِلَى نُفُوسِكُمْ. لِأَنَّهُمْ سَيُسَلِّمُونَكُمْ إِلَى مَجَالِسَ، وَسَيَضْربُونَكُمْ في الْمَحَافِلِ، وَتُوقَفُونَ أَمَامَ وُلَاةٍ وَمُلُوكٍ، مِنْ أَجْلِي، شَهَادَةً لَهُمْ وَلِجَمِيعِ الأُمَمِ.
10 And the gospel must first be preached to all the nations.
Ϩⲱϯ ⲛ̀ϣⲟⲣⲡ ⲛ̀ⲧⲟⲩϩⲓⲱⲓϣ ⲙ̀ⲡⲓⲉⲩⲁⲅⲅⲉⲗⲓⲟⲛ.
10 وَيَنْبَغِي أَوَّلًا أَنْ يُكْرَزَ بِالْإِنْجِيلِ.
11 But when they arrest you and deliver you up, do not worry beforehand, or premeditate what you will speak. But whatever is given you in that hour, speak that; for it is not you who speak, but the Holy Spirit.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉ̀ϣⲱⲡ ⲛ̀ⲧⲟⲩⲉⲛ ⲑⲏⲛⲟⲩ ⲉⲩϯ ⲙ̀ⲙⲱⲧⲉⲛ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉⲣⲉⲣϣⲟⲣⲡ ⲛ̀ϥⲓⲣⲱⲟⲩϣ ϫⲉ ⲟⲩ ⲡⲉⲧⲉⲧⲉⲛⲛⲁⲥⲁϫⲓ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟϥ ⲁⲗⲗⲁ ⲡⲉⲧⲟⲩⲛⲁⲧⲏⲓϥ ⲛⲱⲧⲉⲛ ϧⲉⲛ ϯⲟⲩⲛⲟⲩ ⲉ̀ⲧⲉⲙ̀ⲙⲁⲩ ⲫⲁⲓ ⲡⲉⲧⲉⲧⲉⲛⲛⲁⲥⲁϫⲓ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟϥ ⲛ̀ⲑⲱⲧⲉⲛ ⲅⲁⲣ ⲁⲛ ⲡⲉⲑⲛⲁⲥⲁϫⲓ ⲁⲗⲗⲁ ⲡⲠⲓⲡⲛ︦ⲁ︦ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ ⲡⲉ.
11 فَإذَا قَدَّمُوكُمْ لِيُسَلِّمُوكُمْ، فَلَا تَهْتَمُوا مِنْ قَبْلُ بِمَا تَتَكَلَّمُونَ بِهِ، لِأَنَّكُمْ تُعْطَوْنَ في تِلْكَ السَّاعَةِ مَا تَتَكَلَّمُونَ بِهِ. لأَنْ لَسْتُمْ أَنْتُمُ الْمُتَكَلِّمِينَ بَلِ الرُّوحُ القُدُسُ.
12 Now brother will betray brother to death, and a father his child; and children will rise up against parents and cause them to be put to death.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉ̀ⲣⲉ ⲟⲩⲥⲟⲛ ϯ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩⲥⲟⲛ ⲉ̀ⲫ̀ⲙⲟⲩ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉ̀ⲣⲉ ⲟⲩⲓⲱⲧ ⲉϥⲉ̀ϯ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩϣⲏⲣⲓ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲥⲉⲛⲁⲧⲱⲟⲩⲛⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ϩⲁⲛϣⲏⲣⲓ ⲉ̀ϫⲉⲛ ϩⲁⲛⲓⲟϯ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲥⲉⲛⲁϧⲟⲑⲃⲟⲩ.
12 وَسَيُسَلِّمُ الأَخُ أَخَاهُ إِلَى الْمَوْتِ، وَالأَبُ يُسَلِّمُ ابْنَهُ، وَيَقُومُ الأَوْلَادُ عَلَى آبَائِهِمْ وَيَقْتُلُونَهُمْ.
13 And you will be hated by all for My name’s sake. But he who endures to the end shall be saved.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉ̀ⲣⲉⲧⲉⲛⲉ̀ϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲉⲩⲙⲟⲥϯ ⲙ̀ⲙⲱⲧⲉⲛ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲟⲩⲟⲛ ⲛⲓⲃⲉⲛ ⲉⲑⲃⲉ ⲡⲁⲣⲁⲛ ⲫⲏ ⲇⲉ ⲉⲑⲛⲁⲁ̀ⲙⲟⲛⲓ ⲛ̀ⲧⲟⲧϥ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ⲫⲁⲓ ⲡⲉ ⲫⲏⲉⲑⲛⲁⲛⲟϩⲉⲙ.
13 وَتَكُونُونَ مُبْغَضِينَ مِنَ الْجَمِيعِ لأَجْلِ اسْمِي. وَالَّذِي يَصْبِرُ إِلَى الْمُنْتَهَى فَهَذَا يَخْلُصُ.