Stand in the fear of God and listen to the Holy Gospel. A reading from the Gospel according to our teacher Saint Matthew the Evangelist, and the pure disciple. May his blessings be with us all.
قِفُوا بِخَوْفِ اللهِ، وَأَنْصِتُوا لِسَمَاعِ الإِنْجِيلِ الْمُقَدَّسِ. فَصْلٌ مِنْ بِشَارَةِ الإِنْجِيلِ لِمُعَلِّمِنَا مَارْ متى الْبَشِيرِ، التِّلْمِيذِ الطَّاهِرِ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
From the Psalms of our teacher David the prophet. May his blessings be with us all.
مِنْ مَزَامِيرِ تَرَاتِيلِ مُعَلِّمِنَا دَاوُدَ النَّبِيِّ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
Vespers Psalm
المزمور
	Psalms 33:18-19
(مزامير 33: 18-19)
Many are the afflictions of the righteous, But the Lord delivers him out of them all. He guards all his bones; Not one of them is broken.
Ⲛⲁϣⲱⲟⲩ ⲛⲓⲑ̀ⲗⲩⲯⲓⲥ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲛⲓⲑ̀ⲙⲏⲓ: ⲟⲩⲟϩ ϥ̀ⲛⲁⲛⲁϩⲙⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ Ⲡⲟ︦ⲥ︦ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ⲛ̀ϧⲏⲧⲟⲩ ⲧⲏⲣⲟⲩ: Ⲡⲟ︦ⲥ︦ ⲛⲁⲁ̀ⲣⲉϩ ⲉ̀ⲛⲟⲩⲕⲁⲥ ⲧⲏⲣⲟⲩ: ⲟⲩⲁⲓ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ⲛ̀ϧⲏⲧⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ⲛⲉϥⲗⲟϥⲗⲉϥ. ⲁ︦ⲗ︦.
كَثِيرَةٌ هِيَ أَحْزَانُ الصِّدِّيقِينَ، وَمِنْ جَمِيعِهَا يُنَجِّيهِمِ الرَّبُّ. يَحْفَظُ الرَّبُّ جَمِيعَ عِظَامِهِمْ. وَوَاحِدةٌ مِنْهَا لَا تَنْكَسِرُ. هَلِّلُويَا.
People:
Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
الليلويا.
	Psalm Trailer for the Pope or a Bishop
(Ⲙⲁⲣⲟⲩϭⲁⲥϥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲧ̀ⲉⲕⲕ̀ⲗⲏⲥⲓⲁ̀...)
People:
Amen Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲙⲏⲛ Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
امين الليلويا.
Then the introduction to the Gospel is read.
ثم تقال مقدمة الأنجيل وهي:
Reader:
Blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord. Our Lord, God, Savior and King of us all, Jesus Christ, Son of the living God to whom is glory forever. Amen.
القارﺉُ:
مباركٌ الآتي باسمِ الربِّ إلهِ القواتِ، ربُّنا وإلهُنا ومخلصُنا وملكُنا كلِّنا، يسوعُ المسيحُ، ابنُ اللهِ الحيِّ، الذي لهُ المجدُ إلى الأبدِ. آمين.
Vespers Gospel
الإنجيل
	Matthew 16:24-28
(متى 16: 24-28)
24 Then Jesus said to His disciples, “If anyone desires to come after Me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow Me.
Ⲧⲟⲧⲉ ⲡⲉϫⲉ Ⲓⲏ︦ⲥ︦ ⲛ̀ⲛⲉϥⲙⲁⲑⲏⲧⲏⲥ ϫⲉ ⲫⲏⲉⲑⲟⲩⲱϣ ⲉ̀ⲙⲟϣⲓ ⲛ̀ⲥⲱⲓ ⲙⲁⲣⲉϥϫⲟⲗϥ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲙⲁⲣⲉϥⲱ̀ⲗⲓ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉϥⲥ̀ⲧⲁⲩⲣⲟⲥ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉϥⲙⲟϣⲓ ⲛ̀ⲥⲱⲓ.
24 حِينَئِذٍ قَالَ يَسُوعُ لِتَلَامِيذِهِ: " مَنْ أَرَادَ أَنْ يَتْبَعَنِي فَلْيُنْكِرْ نَفْسَهُ وَيَحْمِلْ صَلِيبَهُ وَيَتْبَعْنِي،
25 For whoever desires to save his life will lose it, but whoever loses his life for My sake will find it.
Ⲫⲏ ⲅⲁⲣ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲱϣ ⲉ̀ⲛⲟϩⲉⲙ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉϥⲯⲩⲭⲏ ⲉϥⲉ̀ⲧⲁⲕⲟⲥ ⲫⲏ ⲇⲉ ⲉⲑⲛⲁⲧⲁⲕⲟ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉϥⲯⲩⲭⲏ ⲉⲑⲃⲏⲧ ⲉϥⲉ̀ϫⲉⲙⲥ.
25 لِأَنَّ مَنْ أَرَادَ أَنْ يُخَلِّصَ نَفْسَهُ يُهْلِكُهَا، وَمَنْ يُهْلِكُ نَفْسَهُ مِنْ أَجْلِي يَجِدُهَا.
26 For what profit is it to a man if he gains the whole world, and loses his own soul? Or what will a man give in exchange for his soul?
Ⲟⲩ ⲅⲁⲣ ⲉ̀ⲧⲉ ⲡⲓⲣⲱⲙⲓ ⲛⲁϫⲉⲙϩⲏⲟⲩ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟϥ ⲁϥϣⲁⲛϫⲉⲙϩⲏⲟⲩ ⲙ̀ⲡⲓⲕⲟⲥⲙⲟⲥ ⲧⲏⲣϥ ⲧⲉϥⲯⲩⲭⲏ ⲇⲉ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉϥϯⲟ̀ⲥⲓ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲛ ⲟⲩ ⲡⲉⲧⲉ ⲡⲓⲣⲱⲙⲓ ⲛⲁⲧⲏⲓϥ ⲛ̀ⲧ̀ϣⲉⲃⲓⲱ̀ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉϥⲯⲩⲭⲏ.
26 لِأَنَّهُ مَاذَا يَنْتَفِعُ الْإِنْسَانُ لَوْ رَبِحَ الْعَالَمَ كُلَّهُ وَخَسِرَ نَفْسَهُ؟ أَوْ مَاذَا يُعْطِي الْإِنْسَانُ فِدَاءً عَنْ نَفْسِهِ؟
27 For the Son of Man will come in the glory of His Father with His angels, and then He will reward each according to his works.
Ⲡ̀ϣⲏⲣⲓ ⲅⲁⲣ ⲙ̀ⲫ̀ⲣⲱⲙⲓ ⲉϥⲛⲏⲟⲩ ϧⲉⲛ ⲡ̀ⲱ̀ⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲡⲉϥⲓⲱⲧ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲛⲉϥⲁⲅⲅⲉⲗⲟⲥ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲧⲟⲧⲉ ϥ̀ⲛⲁϯ ⲙ̀ⲡⲓⲟⲩⲁⲓ ⲡⲓⲟⲩⲁⲓ ⲕⲁⲧⲁ ⲛⲉϥϩ̀ⲃⲏⲟⲩⲓ̀.
27 لِأَنَّ ابْنَ الْإِنْسَانِ سَوْفَ يَأْتِي في مَجْدِ أَبِيهِ مَعَ مَلَائِكَتِهِ، وَحِينَئِذٍ يُجَازِي كُلَّ وَاحِدٍ حَسَبَ أَعْمَالِهِ.
28 “Assuredly, I say to you, there are some standing here who shall not taste death till they see the Son of Man coming in His kingdom.”
Ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ ϯϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ⲛⲱⲧⲉⲛ ϫⲉ ⲟⲩⲟⲛ ϩⲁⲛⲟⲩⲟⲛ ϧⲉⲛ ⲛⲏⲉⲧⲟ̀ϩⲓ ⲉ̀ⲣⲁⲧⲟⲩ ⲙ̀ⲡⲁⲓⲙⲁ ⲛ̀ⲥⲉⲛⲁϫⲉⲙϯⲡⲓ ⲙ̀ⲫ̀ⲙⲟⲩ ⲁⲛ ϣⲁⲧⲟⲩⲛⲁⲩ ⲉ̀Ⲡ̀ϣⲏⲣⲓ ⲙ̀Ⲫ̀ⲣⲱⲙⲓ ⲉϥⲛⲏⲟⲩ ϧⲉⲛ ⲡ̀ⲱ̀ⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲡⲉϥⲓⲱⲧ
28 الْحَقَّ أَقُولُ لَكُمْ: إِنَّ مِنَ الْقِيَامِ هَهُنَا قَوْمًا لَا يَذُوقُونَ الْمَوْتَ حَتَّى يَرَوُا ابْنَ الْإِنْسَانِ آتِيًا في مَجْدِ أَبِيهِ ".