Prophecies
النبوآت
	Jonah 2:2-10
(يونان 2: 2-10)
A reading from Jonah, the prophet. May his holy blessings be with us. Amen.
من يونان النبي بركته المقدسة تكون معنا. آمين.
2 Then Jonah prayed to the Lord his God from the fish's belly and he said: “I cried out to the Lord because of my affliction, And He answered me. “Out of the belly of Sheol I cried, And You heard my voice.
2 فَصَلَّى يُونَانُ إِلَى الرَّبِّ إِلَهِهِ مِنْ جَوْفِ الْحُوتِ، وَقَالَ: " إِلَى الرَّبِّ إلَهِي صَرَخْتُ فِي ضِيْقِي، فَاِسْتَجَابَ لِي. وَمِنْ جَوْفِ الْهَاوِيَةِ سَمِعَ صَوتِي.
3 For You cast me into the deep, Into the heart of the seas, And the floods surrounded me; All Your billows and Your waves passed over me.
3 قَدْ طَرَحْتَنِي فِي الْعُمْقِ فِي قَاعِ الْبَحْرِ، فَأَحَاطَتْ بِيَ الْأَنْهَارُ، وَجَازَتْ عَلَيَّ جَمِيعُ تَيَّارَاتِكَ وَأَمْوَاجِكَ.
4 Then I said, ‘I have been cast out of Your sight; Shall I indeed look again toward Your holy temple?
4 فَقُلْتُ: إِنِّي قَدْ طُرِدْتُ عَنْ عَيْنَيْكَ. فَهَلْ أَعَوْدُ أَنْظُرُ هَيْكَلَ قُدْسِكَ؟
5 The waters surrounded me, even to my soul; The deep closed around me; My head went down to the clefts of mountains.
5 قَدْ اِنْسَكَبَتْ عَليَّ الْمِيَاهُ حَتَّى نَفْسِي. وغَطَّانِيَ الْغَمْرُ الْأَقْصَى. غَطَسَتْ رَأْسِي فِي شُقُوقِ جِبَالٍ.
6 I went down into the earth whose bars are the everlasting barriers; Yet You shall bring up my life from the ruines, O Lord, my God.
6 وَنَزَلْتُ إِلَى أَرْضٍ، مَزَالِيجُهَا مُغْلَقَةٌ إِلَى الْأَبَدِ. وَلَكِنَّكَ سَتُصْعِدُ حَيَاتِي مِنَ الْفَسَادِ أَيُّهَا الرَّبُّ إِلَهِي.
7 “When my soul fainted within me, I remembered the mercy of the Lord; And my prayer come up to You, Into Your holy temple.
7 عِنْدَ فَنَاءِ نَفْسِي مِنِّي، تَذَكَّرْتُ رَحْمَةَ الرَّبِّ، فَلْتَصْعَدْ إِلَيْكَ صَلَاتِي إِلَى هَيْكَلِكَ الْمُقَدَّسِ.
8 “Those who regard vanities and lies have forsaken their own Mercy.
8 إِنَّ الَّذِينَ يَحْفَظُونَ الْأَبَاطِيلَ وَالْكَذِبَ يُهْمِلُونَ رَحْمَتَهُمْ.
9 But I will sacrifice to You With the voice of praise and thanksgiving; I will pay all what I have vowed to You, the Lord of my salvation.”
9 أَمَّا أَنَا فَبِصَوْتِ تَضَرُّعٍ وَاِعْتِرَافٍ أَذْبَحُ لَكَ، وَمَا نَذَرْتُهُ أُوفِيكَ بِهِ أَيُّهَا الرَّبُّ مُخَلِّصِي ".
10 So the Lord commanded the fish, and it cast up Jonah on the dry land.
10 فَأَمَرَ الرَّبُّ الْحُوتَ فَقَذَفَ يُونَانَ إِلَى البَرِّ.
Glory be to the Holy Trinity, our God, forever and unto the ages of all ages. Amen.
Ⲟⲩⲱ̀ⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ϯⲧ̀ⲣⲓⲁⲥ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ Ⲡⲉⲛⲛⲟⲩϯ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛⲉⲙ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲛⲓⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲧⲏⲣⲟⲩ: ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ.
مجداً للثالوث القدوس إلهنا الى أبد الآبدين كلها آمين.