Stand in the fear of God and listen to the Holy Gospel. A reading from the Gospel according to our teacher Saint Luke the Evangelist, and the pure disciple. May his blessings be with us all.
قِفُوا بِخَوْفِ اللهِ، وَأَنْصِتُوا لِسَمَاعِ الإِنْجِيلِ الْمُقَدَّسِ. فَصْلٌ مِنْ بِشَارَةِ الإِنْجِيلِ لِمُعَلِّمِنَا مَارْ لوقا الْبَشِيرِ، التِّلْمِيذِ الطَّاهِرِ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
From the Psalms of our teacher David the prophet. May his blessings be with us all.
مِنْ مَزَامِيرِ تَرَاتِيلِ مُعَلِّمِنَا دَاوُدَ النَّبِيِّ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
Matins Psalm
المزمور
	Psalms 102:13, 8-9
(مزامير 102: 13, 8-9)
He remembers that we are dust. As for man, his days are like grass. He will not always strive with us, Nor will He keep His anger forever. He has not dealt with us according to our sins, Nor punished us according to our iniquities.
Ⲁⲣⲓⲫ̀ⲙⲉⲩⲓ̀ Ⲡⲟ︦ⲥ︦ ϫⲉ ⲁ̀ⲛⲟⲛ ⲟⲩⲕⲁϩⲓ: ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲫ̀ⲣⲱⲙⲓ ⲙ̀ⲫ̀ⲣⲏϯ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩⲥⲓⲙ ϧⲉⲛ ⲛⲉϥⲉ̀ϩⲟⲟⲩ: ϥ̀ⲛⲁϫⲱⲛⲧ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟⲛ ⲁⲛ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ϣⲁ ϧⲁⲉ̀ ⲟⲩⲇⲉ ⲛ̀ⲛⲉϥⲙ̀ⲃⲟⲛ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ: ⲉ̀ⲧⲁϥⲓ̀ⲣⲓ ⲇⲉ ⲛⲁⲛ ⲁⲛ ⲕⲁⲧⲁ ⲛⲉⲛⲛⲟⲃⲓ ⲟⲩⲇⲉ ⲕⲁⲧⲁ ⲛⲉⲛⲁ̀ⲛⲟⲙⲓⲁ̀ ⲁ̀ⲛⲟⲛ ⲁϥϯϣⲉⲃⲓⲱ̀ ⲛⲁⲛ. ⲁ︦ⲗ︦.
اُذْكُرْ يَا رَبُّ أَنَّنَا تُرَابٌ. الْإِنْسَانُ أَيَّامُهُ كَالْعُشْبِ. لَيْسَ إِلَى الْاِنْقِضَاءِ يَسْخَطُ وَلَا إِلَى الدَّهْرِ يَحْقِدُ. لَا عَلَى حَسَبِ خَطَايَانَا عَامَلَنَا وَلَا عَلَى حَسَبِ آثَامِنَا كَافَأَنَا.
People:
Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
الليلويا.
	Psalm Trailer for the Pope or a Bishop
(Ⲙⲁⲣⲟⲩϭⲁⲥϥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲧ̀ⲉⲕⲕ̀ⲗⲏⲥⲓⲁ̀...)
People:
Amen Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲙⲏⲛ Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
امين الليلويا.
Then the introduction to the Gospel is read.
ثم تقال مقدمة الأنجيل وهي:
Reader:
Blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord. Our Lord, God, Savior and King of us all, Jesus Christ, Son of the living God to whom is glory forever. Amen.
القارﺉُ:
مباركٌ الآتي باسمِ الربِّ إلهِ القواتِ، ربُّنا وإلهُنا ومخلصُنا وملكُنا كلِّنا، يسوعُ المسيحُ، ابنُ اللهِ الحيِّ، الذي لهُ المجدُ إلى الأبدِ. آمين.
Matins Gospel
الإنجيل
	Luke 13:6-9
(لوقا 13: 6-9)
6 He also spoke this parable: “A certain man had a fig tree planted in his vineyard, and he came seeking fruit on it and found none.
Ⲛⲁϥϫⲱ ⲇⲉ ⲛⲧⲁⲓⲡⲁⲣⲁⲃⲟⲗⲏ ⲛⲱⲟⲩ ϫⲉ ⲛⲉ ⲟⲩⲟⲛ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲟⲩⲁⲓ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩⲃⲱ ⲛ̀ⲕⲉⲛⲧⲉ ⲉⲥ ϭⲏⲟⲩⲧ ϧⲉⲛ ⲡⲉϥⲓⲁϩⲁ̀ⲗⲟⲗⲓ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁϥⲓ̀ ⲁϥⲕⲱϯ ⲛ̀ⲥⲁ ⲟⲩⲧⲁϩ ϩⲓⲱⲧⲥ ⲟϩ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉϥϫⲓⲙⲓ.
6 وَقَالَ لَهُمْ هَذَا الْمَثَلَ: " كَانَ لِوَاحِدٍ تِينَةٌ مَغرُوسَةٌ فِي كَرْمِهِ، فَجَاءَ يَطْلُبُ فِيهَا ثَمَرًا فَلَمْ يَجِدْ.
7 Then he said to the keeper of his vineyard, ‘Look, for three years I have come seeking fruit on this fig tree and find none. Cut it down; why does it use up the ground?’
Ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ⲇⲉ ⲙ̀ⲡⲓⲟⲩⲱⲓ ⲛ̀ⲁ̀ⲗⲟⲗⲓ ϫⲉ ⲓⲥ ⲅ︦ϯ ⲛ̀ⲣⲟⲙⲡⲓ ⲓⲥϫⲉⲛ ⲉⲓⲛⲏⲟⲩ ⲉⲓⲕⲱϯ ⲛ̀ⲥⲁ ⲟⲩⲧⲁϩ ϧⲉⲛ ⲧⲁⲓⲃⲱ ⲛ̀ⲕⲉⲛⲧⲉ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ϫⲓⲙⲓ ⲁⲛ ⲕⲟⲣϫⲥ ⲟⲩⲛ ϩⲓⲛⲁ ⲟⲩ ϫⲉ ⲥⲉⲣⲡ̀ⲕⲉⲕⲱⲣϥ ⲙ̀ⲡⲓⲕⲁϩⲓ.
7 فَقَالَ لِلْكَرَّامِ: هَا إِنَّ لِي ثَلَاثَ سِنِينَ آتِي وَأَطْلُبُ ثَمَرًا فِي هَذِهِ التِّينَةِ فَلَا أَجِدُ. فَاقْطَعْهَا! فَلِمَاذَا تُعَطِّلُ الْأَرْضَ أَيْضًا؟
8 But he answered and said to him, ‘Sir, let it alone this year also, until I dig around it and fertilize it.
Ⲛ̀ⲑⲟϥ ⲇⲉ ⲁϥⲉⲣⲟⲩⲱ ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ⲛⲁϥ ϫⲉ ⲡⲁϫ︦ⲥ︦ ⲭⲁⲥ ⲛ̀ⲧⲁⲓⲕⲉⲣⲟⲙⲡⲓ ⲁϯϭⲣⲏ ϧⲁⲣⲁⲧⲥ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲁϯⲙⲁϩⲣⲟ ⲛⲁⲥ.
8 فَأَجَابَ وَقَالَ لَهُ: يَا سَيِّدُ، دَعْهَا هَذِهِ السَّنَةَ أَيْضًا، حَتَّى أَعْزِقَ حَوْلَهَا وَأَضَعَ زِبْلًا.
9 And if it bears fruit, well. But if not, after that you can cut it down.’”
Ⲁⲣⲏⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉⲥⲉ̀ⲛ ⲟⲩⲧⲁϩ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ⲛ̀ϯⲕⲉⲣⲟⲙⲡⲓ ⲉⲑⲛⲏⲟⲩ ⲉϣⲱⲡ ⲇⲉ ⲁⲥϣ̀ⲧⲉⲙⲓ̀ⲛⲓ ⲉⲕⲉ̀ⲕⲟⲣϫⲥ.
9 فَإِنْ أَثْمَرَتْ، وَإِلَّا فَنَقْطَعُهَا فِيمَا بَعْدُ ".