Stand in the fear of God and listen to the Holy Gospel. A reading from the Gospel according to our teacher Saint Matthew the Evangelist, and the pure disciple. May his blessings be with us all.
قِفُوا بِخَوْفِ اللهِ، وَأَنْصِتُوا لِسَمَاعِ الإِنْجِيلِ الْمُقَدَّسِ. فَصْلٌ مِنْ بِشَارَةِ الإِنْجِيلِ لِمُعَلِّمِنَا مَارْ متى الْبَشِيرِ، التِّلْمِيذِ الطَّاهِرِ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
From the Psalms of our teacher David the prophet. May his blessings be with us all.
مِنْ مَزَامِيرِ تَرَاتِيلِ مُعَلِّمِنَا دَاوُدَ النَّبِيِّ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
Matins Psalm
المزمور
	Psalms 17: 1
(مزامير 17: 1)
I will love You, O Lord, my strength. The Lord is my firm support and my refuge and my deliverer; My God, my helper, in whom I will trust.
Ϯⲛⲁⲙⲉⲛⲣⲓⲧⲕ Ⲡⲟ︦ⲥ︦ ⲧⲁϫⲟⲙ: Ⲡⲟ︦ⲥ︦ ⲡⲉ ⲡⲁⲧⲁϫⲣⲟ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲡⲁⲙⲁⲙ̀ⲫⲱⲧ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲡⲁⲣⲉϥⲛⲁϩⲙⲉⲧ: ⲡⲁⲛⲟⲩϯ ⲡⲉ ⲡⲁⲃⲟⲏ̀ⲑⲟⲥ: ⲉⲓⲉⲣϩⲉⲗⲡⲓⲥ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟϥ: ⲁ︦ⲗ︦.
أُحِبُّكَ يَا رَبُّ قُوَّتِي، الرَّبُّ هُوَ ثَبَاتِي وَمَلْجَإِي وَمُخَلِّصِي، إلَهِي عَوْنِي، وَعَلَيْهِ أَتَّكِلُ.
People:
Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
الليلويا.
	Psalm Trailer for the Pope or a Bishop
(Ⲙⲁⲣⲟⲩϭⲁⲥϥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲧ̀ⲉⲕⲕ̀ⲗⲏⲥⲓⲁ̀...)
People:
Amen Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲙⲏⲛ Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
امين الليلويا.
Then the introduction to the Gospel is read.
ثم تقال مقدمة الأنجيل وهي:
Reader:
Blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord. Our Lord, God, Savior and King of us all, Jesus Christ, Son of the living God to whom is glory forever. Amen.
القارﺉُ:
مباركٌ الآتي باسمِ الربِّ إلهِ القواتِ، ربُّنا وإلهُنا ومخلصُنا وملكُنا كلِّنا، يسوعُ المسيحُ، ابنُ اللهِ الحيِّ، الذي لهُ المجدُ إلى الأبدِ. آمين.
Matins Gospel
الإنجيل
	Matthew 7:22-29
(متى 7: 22-29)
22 Many will say to Me in that day, ‘Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in Your name, cast out demons in Your name, and done many wonders in Your name?’
Ⲟⲩⲟⲛ ⲟⲩⲙⲏϣ ⲅⲁⲣ ⲉⲩⲛⲁϫⲟⲥ ⲛⲏⲓ ϧⲉⲛ ⲡⲓⲉ̀ϩⲟⲟⲩ ⲉ̀ⲧⲉⲙ̀ⲙⲁⲩ ϫⲉ Ⲡⲟ︦ⲥ︦ Ⲡⲟ︦ⲥ︦ ⲙⲏ ϧⲉⲛ ⲡⲉⲕⲣⲁⲛ ⲁⲛ ⲁⲛⲉⲣⲡ̀ⲣⲟⲫⲏⲧⲉⲩⲓⲛ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ϧⲉⲛ ⲡⲉⲕⲣⲁⲛ ⲁⲛϩⲓ ⲇⲉⲙⲱⲛ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ϧⲉⲛ ⲡⲉⲕⲣⲁⲛ ⲁⲛⲓ̀ⲣⲓ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩⲙⲏϣ ⲛ̀ϫⲟⲙ.
22 لِأَنَّهُ يُوجَدُ كَثِيرُونَ سَيَقُولُونَ لِي فِي ذلِكَ الْيَوْمِ: يَا رَبُّ، يَا رَبُّ! أَلَيْسَ بِاسْمِكَ تَنَبَّأْنَا، وَبِاسْمِكَ أَخْرَجْنَا شَيَاطِينَ، وَبِاسْمِكَ صَنَعْنَا قُوَّاتٍ كَثِيرَةً؟
23 And then I will declare to them, ‘I never knew you; depart from Me, you who practice lawlessness!’
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲧⲟⲧⲉ ⲉⲓⲉ̀ⲟⲩⲱⲛϩ ⲛⲱⲟⲩ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ϫⲉ ⲙ̀ⲡⲓⲥⲟⲩⲉⲛ ⲑⲏⲛⲟⲩ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲙⲁϣⲉⲛⲱⲧⲉⲛ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ϩⲁⲣⲟⲓ ⲛⲓⲉⲣⲅⲁⲧⲏⲥ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ϯⲁ̀ⲛⲟⲙⲓⲁ̀.
23 فَحِينَئِذٍ أُصَرِّحُ لَهُـمْ: إنِّــي لَـمْ أَعْرِفْكُـمْ قَـطُّ! اذْهَبُـوا عَنِّـي يَـا فَاعِلِـي الْإِثْـمِ!
24 “Therefore whoever hears these sayings of Mine, and does them, I will liken him to a wise man who built his house on the rock:
Ⲟⲩⲟⲛ ⲛⲓⲃⲉⲛ ⲟⲩⲛ ⲉⲧⲥⲱⲧⲉⲙ ⲉ̀ⲛⲁⲥⲁϫⲓ ⲛⲁⲓ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉϥⲓ̀ⲣⲓ ⲙ̀ⲙⲱⲟⲩ ⲉⲓⲉ̀ⲧⲉⲛⲑⲱⲛϥ ⲉ̀ⲟⲩⲣⲱⲙⲓ ⲛ̀ⲥⲁⲃⲉ ⲫⲏⲉ̀ⲧⲁϥⲕⲱⲧ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉϥⲏⲓ ϩⲓϫⲉⲛ ϯⲡⲉⲧⲣⲁ.
24 فَكُلُّ مَنْ يَسْمَعُ أَقْوَالِي هذِهِ وَيَعْمَلُ بِهَا، أُشَبِّهُهُ بِرَجُلٍ عَاقِلٍ، بَنَى بَيْتَهُ عَلَى الصَّخْرِ.
25 and the rain descended, the floods came, and the winds blew and beat on that house; and it did not fall, for it was founded on the rock.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁϥⲓ̀ ⲉ̀ⲡⲉⲥⲏⲧ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲡⲓⲙⲟⲩⲛϩⲱⲟⲩ ⲁⲩⲓ̀ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲛⲓⲓⲁⲣⲱⲟⲩ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁⲩⲛⲓϥⲓ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲛⲓⲑⲏⲟⲩ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁⲩⲕⲱⲗϩ ⲉ̀ⲡⲓⲏⲓ ⲉ̀ⲧⲉⲙ̀ⲙⲁⲩ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉϥϩⲉⲓ ⲛⲁⲣⲉ ⲧⲉϥⲥⲉⲛϯ ⲅⲁⲣ ⲧⲁϫⲣⲏⲟⲩⲧ ⲡⲉ ϩⲓϫⲉⲛ ϯⲡⲉⲧⲣⲁ.
25 فَنَزَلَ الْمَطَرُ، وَجَاءَتِ الأَنْهَارُ، وَهَبَّت الرِّيَاحُ، وَصَدَمَتْ ذلِكَ الْبَيْتَ فَلَمْ يَسْقُطْ؛ لِأَنَّ أَسَاسَهُ كَانَ ثَابِتًا عَلَى الصَّخْرِ.
26 “But everyone who hears these sayings of Mine, and does not do them, will be like a foolish man who built his house on the sand:
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲟⲩⲟⲛ ⲛⲓⲃⲉⲛ ⲉⲧⲥⲱⲧⲉⲙ ⲉ̀ⲛⲁⲥⲁϫⲓ ⲛⲁⲓ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉϥⲓ̀ⲣⲓ ⲙ̀ⲙⲱⲟⲩ ⲁⲛ ⲉⲓⲉ̀ⲧⲉⲛⲑⲱⲛϥ ⲉ̀ⲟⲩⲣⲱⲙⲓ ⲛ̀ⲥⲟϫ ⲫⲁⲓ ⲉ̀ⲧⲁϥⲕⲱⲧ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉϥⲏⲓ ϩⲓϫⲉⲛ ⲡⲓϣⲱ.
26 وَكُلُّ مَنْ يَسْمَعُ أَقْوَالِي هَذِهِ وَلَمْ يَعْمَلْ بِهَا، يُشَبَّهُ بِرَجُلٍ جَاهِلٍ، بَنَى بَيْتَهُ عَلَى الرَّمْلِ.
27 and the rain descended, the floods came, and the winds blew and beat on that house; and it fell. And great was its fall.”
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁϥⲓ̀ ⲉ̀ⲡⲉⲥⲏⲧ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲡⲓⲙⲟⲩⲛϩⲱⲟⲩ ⲁⲩⲓ̀ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲛⲓⲓⲁⲣⲱⲟⲩ ⲁⲩⲛⲓϥⲓ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲛⲓⲑⲏⲟⲩ ⲁⲩⲕⲱⲗϩ ⲉ̀ⲡⲓⲏⲓ ⲉ̀ⲧⲉⲙ̀ⲙⲁⲩ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁϥϩⲉⲓ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲡⲉϥϩⲉⲓ ⲛⲉ ⲟⲩⲛⲓϣϯ ⲡⲉ.
27 فَنَزَلَ الْمَطَرُ، وَجَرَتِ الْأَنْهَارُ، وَهَبَّتِ الرِّياحُ، وَصَدَمَتْ ذَلِكَ الْبَيْتَ فَسَقَطَ، وَكَانَ سُقُوطُهُ عَظِيمًا!
28 And so it was, when Jesus had ended these sayings, that the people were astonished at His teaching,
Ⲁⲥϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲇⲉ ⲉ̀ⲧⲁ Ⲓⲏ︦ⲥ︦ ϫⲉⲕ ⲛⲁⲓⲥⲁϫⲓ ⲧⲏⲣⲟⲩ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ⲛⲁⲩⲉⲣϣ̀ⲫⲏⲣⲓ ⲡⲉ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲛⲓⲙⲏϣ ⲉ̀ϫⲉⲛ ⲧⲉϥⲥ̀ⲃⲱ.
28 وَلَمَّا أَتَمَّ يَسُوعُ هَذَا الْكَلَامَ كُلَّهُ بُهِتَتِ الْجُمُوعُ مِنْ تَعْلِيمِهِ،
29 for He taught them as one having authority, and not as the scribes.
Ⲛⲁϥϯⲥ̀ⲃⲱ ⲅⲁⲣ ⲛⲱⲟⲩ ⲡⲉ ϩⲱⲥ ⲉ̀ⲟⲩⲟⲛ̀ⲧⲉϥⲉⲣϣⲓϣⲓ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲙ̀ⲫ̀ⲣⲏϯ ⲁⲛ ⲛ̀ⲛⲟⲩⲥⲁϧ
29 لِأَنَّهُ كَانَ يُعَلِّمُهُمْ كَمَنْ لَهُ سُلْطَانٌ وَلَيْسَ كَكَتَبَتِهِمْ.