Stand in the fear of God and listen to the Holy Gospel. A reading from the Gospel according to our teacher Saint Luke the Evangelist, and the pure disciple. May his blessings be with us all.
قِفُوا بِخَوْفِ اللهِ، وَأَنْصِتُوا لِسَمَاعِ الإِنْجِيلِ الْمُقَدَّسِ. فَصْلٌ مِنْ بِشَارَةِ الإِنْجِيلِ لِمُعَلِّمِنَا مَارْ لوقا الْبَشِيرِ، التِّلْمِيذِ الطَّاهِرِ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
From the Psalms of our teacher David the prophet. May his blessings be with us all.
مِنْ مَزَامِيرِ تَرَاتِيلِ مُعَلِّمِنَا دَاوُدَ النَّبِيِّ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
Vespers Psalm
المزمور
	Psalms 104:1
(مزامير 104: 1)
Give thanks to the Lord! Call upon His name; declare His deeds among the peoples! Sing to Him, sing praises to Him; Talk of all His wondrous works! Glory in His holy name.
Ⲟⲩⲱⲛϩ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ⲙ̀Ⲡⲟ︦ⲥ︦ ⲟⲩϩ ⲙⲟⲩϯ ⲉ̀ⲡⲉϥⲣⲁⲛ: ϩⲓⲱⲓϣ ⲛ̀ⲛⲉϥϩ̀ⲃⲏⲟⲩⲓ̀ ϧⲉⲛ ⲛⲓⲉⲑⲛⲟⲥ: ϩⲱⲥ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟϥ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲁ̀ⲣⲓⲯⲁⲗⲓⲛ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟϥ ⲥⲁϫⲓ ⲛ̀ⲛⲉϥϣ̀ⲫⲏⲣⲓ ⲧⲏⲣⲟⲩ: ϣⲟⲩϣⲟⲩ ⲙ̀ⲙⲱⲧⲉⲛ ϧⲉⲛ ⲡⲉϥⲣⲁⲛ ⲉ︦ⲑ︦ⲩ︦. ⲁ︦ⲗ︦.
اِعْتَرِفُوا لِلرَّبِّ وَادْعُوا بِاسْمِهِ. نَادُوا في الأُمَمِ بِأَعْمَالِهِ. سَبِّحُوه وَرَتِّلُوا لَهُ، حَدِّثُوا بِجَمِيعِ عَجَائِبِهِ. افْتَخِرُوا بِاسْمِهِ القُدُّوسِ.
People:
Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
الليلويا.
	Psalm Trailer for the Pope or a Bishop
(Ⲙⲁⲣⲟⲩϭⲁⲥϥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲧ̀ⲉⲕⲕ̀ⲗⲏⲥⲓⲁ̀...)
People:
Amen Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲙⲏⲛ Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
امين الليلويا.
Then the introduction to the Gospel is read.
ثم تقال مقدمة الأنجيل وهي:
Reader:
Blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord. Our Lord, God, Savior and King of us all, Jesus Christ, Son of the living God to whom is glory forever. Amen.
القارﺉُ:
مباركٌ الآتي باسمِ الربِّ إلهِ القواتِ، ربُّنا وإلهُنا ومخلصُنا وملكُنا كلِّنا، يسوعُ المسيحُ، ابنُ اللهِ الحيِّ، الذي لهُ المجدُ إلى الأبدِ. آمين.
Vespers Gospel
الإنجيل
	Luke 9:1-6
(لوقا 9: 1-6)
1 Then He called His twelve disciples together and gave them power and authority over all demons, and to cure diseases.
Ⲉⲧⲁϥⲙⲟⲩϯ ⲇⲉ ⲉ̀ⲡⲓⲓ︦ⲃ︦ ⲛ̀ⲁⲡⲟⲥⲧⲟⲗⲟⲥ ⲁϥϯϫⲟⲙ ⲛⲱⲟⲩ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲟⲩⲉⲣϣⲓϣⲓ ⲉ̀ϩ̀ⲣⲏⲓ ⲉ̀ϫⲉⲛ ⲛⲓⲇⲉⲙⲱⲛ ⲧⲏⲣⲟⲩ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲛⲓϣⲱⲛⲓ.
1 ودَعَا الاِثْنَيْ عَشَرَ رَسُولًا، وَأَعْطَاهُمْ قُوَّةً وَسُلْطَانًا عَلَى جَمِيعِ الشَّيَاطِينِ وَشِفَاءِ الْأَمْرَاضِ،
2 He sent them to preach the kingdom of God and to heal the sick.
Ⲩⲟϩ ⲁϥⲟⲩⲟⲣⲡⲟⲩ ⲉ̀ϩⲓⲱⲓϣ ⲛ̀ϯⲙⲉⲧⲟⲩⲣⲟ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲫϯ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉ̀ⲧⲁⲗϭⲟ ⲛ̀ⲛⲏⲉⲧϣⲱⲛⲓ.
2 وَأَرْسَلَهُمْ لِيَكْرِزُوا بِمَلَكُوتِ اللَّهِ وَيَشْفُوا الْمَرْضَى.
3 And He said to them, “Take nothing for the journey, neither staffs nor bag nor bread nor money; and do not have two tunics apiece.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ⲛⲱⲟⲩ ϫⲉ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉⲣⲉⲗ ϩ̀ⲗⲓ ⲉ̀ⲫ̀ⲙⲱⲓⲧ ⲩⲇⲉ ϣ̀ⲃⲱⲧ ⲟⲩⲇⲉ ⲡⲏⲣⲁ ⲟⲩⲇⲉ ⲱⲓⲕ ⲟⲩⲇⲉ ϩⲁⲧ ⲟⲩⲇⲉ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉⲣⲭⲁ ϣ̀ⲑⲏⲛ ⲥ̀ⲛⲟⲩϯ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉⲛ ⲑⲏⲛⲟⲩ.
3 وَقَالَ لَهُمْ: " لَا تَحْمِلُوا شَيْئًا لِلطَّرِيقِ، لَا عَصًا وَلَا مِزْوَدًا وَلَا خُبْزًا وَلَا فِضَّةً، وَلَا يَكُونُ لِلْوَاحِدِ ثَوْبَانِ.
4 “Whatever house you enter, stay there, and from there depart.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲡⲓⲏⲓ ⲉⲧⲉⲧⲉⲛⲛⲁϣⲉ ⲛⲱⲧⲉⲛ ⲉ̀ϧⲟⲩⲛ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟϥ ϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲙ̀ⲙⲁⲩ ϣⲁⲧⲉⲧⲉⲛⲓ̀ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ⲙ̀ⲙⲁⲩ.
4 وَأَيُّ بَيْتٍ دَخَلْتُمُوهُ فَهُنَاكَ أَقِيمُوا، وَمِنْ هُنَاكَ اخْرُجُوا.
5 And whoever will not receive you, when you go out of that city, shake off the very dust from your feet as a testimony against them.”
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛⲏⲉⲧⲉⲛ̀ⲥⲉⲛⲁϣⲉⲡ ⲑⲏⲛⲟⲩ ⲉ̀ⲣⲱⲟⲩ ⲁⲛ ⲉⲣⲉⲧⲉⲛⲛⲏⲟⲩ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ϧⲉⲛ ϯⲃⲁⲕⲓ ⲉⲧⲉⲙ̀ⲙⲁⲩ ⲛⲉϩ ⲡ̀ϣⲱⲓϣ ⲛ̀ⲛⲉⲧⲉⲛϭⲁⲗⲁⲩϫ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ⲉⲩⲙⲉⲧⲙⲉⲑⲣⲉ ⲛⲱⲟⲩ.
5 وَكُلُّ مَنْ لَا يَقْبَلُكُمْ فَاخْرُجُوا مِنْ تِلْكَ الْمَدِينَةِ، وَانْفُضُوا غُبَارَ أَرْجُلِكُمْ شَهَادَةً عَلَيْهِمْ ".
6 So they departed and went through the towns, preaching the gospel and healing everywhere.
Ⲉⲩⲛⲏⲟⲩ ⲇⲉ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ⲛⲁⲩⲙⲟϣⲧ ⲡⲉ ⲕⲁⲧⲁ ϯⲙⲓ ⲩϩⲓϣⲉⲛⲛⲟⲩϥⲓ ⲩⲟϩ ⲉⲩⲉⲣⲫⲁϧⲣⲓ ϧⲉⲛ ⲙⲁⲓ ⲛⲓⲃⲉⲛ.
6 فَلَمَّا خَرَجُوا كَانُوا يَطُوفُونَ كُلَّ قَرْيَةٍ يُبَشِّرُونَ وَيَشْفُونَ فِي كُلِّ مَوْضِعٍ.