Stand in the fear of God and listen to the Holy Gospel. A reading from the Gospel according to our teacher Saint Mark the Evangelist, and the pure disciple. May his blessings be with us all.
قِفُوا بِخَوْفِ اللهِ، وَأَنْصِتُوا لِسَمَاعِ الإِنْجِيلِ الْمُقَدَّسِ. فَصْلٌ مِنْ بِشَارَةِ الإِنْجِيلِ لِمُعَلِّمِنَا مَارْ مرقس الْبَشِيرِ، التِّلْمِيذِ الطَّاهِرِ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
From the Psalms of our teacher David the prophet. May his blessings be with us all.
مِنْ مَزَامِيرِ تَرَاتِيلِ مُعَلِّمِنَا دَاوُدَ النَّبِيِّ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
Matins Psalm
المزمور
	Psalms 101:16,17
(مزامير 101: 16,17)
From heaven the Lord viewed the earth, To hear the groaning of the prisoner. To declare the name of the Lord in Zion, And His praise in Jerusalem.
Ⲡ̀ⲟ︦ⲥ︦ ⲁϥϫⲟⲩϣⲧ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ϧⲉⲛ ⲧ̀ⲫⲉ ⲉ̀ϫⲉⲛ ⲡⲓⲕⲁϩⲓ: ⲉ̀ⲥⲱⲧⲉⲙ ⲉ̀ⲡ̀ϥⲓⲁ̀ϩⲟⲙ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲛⲏⲉⲧϩⲱⲟⲩⲓ̀ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉⲇⲏⲥ. Ⲉⲑⲣⲟⲩⲫⲓⲣⲓ ⲉ̀ⲫ̀ⲣⲁⲛ ⲙ̀Ⲡ̀ⲟ︦ⲥ︦ ϧⲉⲛ Ⲥⲓⲱⲛ: ⲛⲉⲙ ⲡⲉϥⲥ̀ⲙⲟⲩ ϧⲉⲛ Ⲓⲉⲣⲟⲩⲥⲁⲗⲏⲙ. Ⲁ︦ⲗ︦.
الرَّبُّ نَظَرَ مِنَ السَّمَاءِ عَلَى الْأَرْضِ؛ لِيَسْمَعَ تَنَهُّدَ الْمَغْلُولِينَ. لِيُخْبِرُوا فِي صِهْيَوْنَ بِاسْمِ الرَّبِّ، وَبِتَسْبِحَتِهِ فِي أُورُشَلِيمَ. هَلِّلُويَا.
People:
Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
الليلويا.
	Psalm Trailer for the Pope or a Bishop
(Ⲙⲁⲣⲟⲩϭⲁⲥϥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲧ̀ⲉⲕⲕ̀ⲗⲏⲥⲓⲁ̀...)
People:
Amen Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲙⲏⲛ Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
امين الليلويا.
Then the introduction to the Gospel is read.
ثم تقال مقدمة الأنجيل وهي:
Reader:
Blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord. Our Lord, God, Savior and King of us all, Jesus Christ, Son of the living God to whom is glory forever. Amen.
القارﺉُ:
مباركٌ الآتي باسمِ الربِّ إلهِ القواتِ، ربُّنا وإلهُنا ومخلصُنا وملكُنا كلِّنا، يسوعُ المسيحُ، ابنُ اللهِ الحيِّ، الذي لهُ المجدُ إلى الأبدِ. آمين.
Matins Gospel
الإنجيل
	Mark 12:41-44
(مرقس 12: 41-44)
41 Now Jesus sat opposite the treasury and saw how the people put money into the treasury. And many who were rich put in much.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉ̀ⲧⲁϥϩⲉⲙⲥⲓ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉⲙ̀ⲑⲟ ⲙ̀ⲡⲓⲅⲁⲍⲟⲫⲩⲗⲁⲕⲓⲟⲛ ⲛⲁϥⲛⲁⲩ ϫⲉ ⲡⲱⲥ ⲛⲓⲙⲏϣ ϩⲓ ϩⲟⲙⲧ ⲉ̀ⲡⲓⲅⲁⲍⲟⲫⲩⲗⲁⲕⲓⲟⲛ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲟⲩⲙⲏϣ ⲛ̀ⲣⲁⲙⲁⲟ̀ ⲛⲁⲩϩⲓⲟⲩⲓ̀ ⲛ̀ϩⲁⲛⲙⲏϣ.
41 ثُمَّ جَلَسَ يَسُوعُ قُدَّامَ الْخِزَانَةِ، وَكَانَ يَنْظُرُ كَيْفَ يُلْقِي الْجَمْعُ نُحَاسًا فِي الْخِزَانَةِ. وَكَانَ أَغْنِيَاءُ كَثِيرُونَ يُلْقُونَ كَثِيرًا.
42 Then one poor widow came and threw in two mites, which make a quadrans.
Ⲉⲧⲁⲥⲓ̀ ⲇⲉ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲟⲩⲭⲏⲣⲁ ⲛ̀ϩⲏⲕⲓ ⲁⲥϩⲓⲟⲩⲒ̀ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉⲃⲓ ⲥ̀ⲛⲟⲩϯ ⲉ̀ⲧⲉ ⲟⲩⲕⲟⲛⲇ̀ⲣⲁⲛⲧⲏⲥ ⲡⲉ.
42 فَجَاءَتْ أَرْمَلَةٌ مِسْكِينَةٌ فَأَلْقَتْ فَلْسَيْنِ، قِيمَتُهُمَا رُبْعٌ.
43 So He called His disciples to Himself and said to them, “Assuredly, I say to you that this poor widow has put in more than all those who have given to the treasury;
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉ̀ⲧⲁϥⲙⲟⲩϯ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϥⲙⲁⲑⲏⲧⲏⲥ ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ⲛⲱⲟⲩ ϫⲉ ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ ϯϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ⲛⲱⲧⲉⲛ ϫⲉ ⲧⲁⲓⲭⲏⲣⲁ ⲛ̀ϩⲏⲕⲓ ⲁⲥϩⲓⲟⲩⲓ̀ ⲉ̀ϩⲟⲧⲉ ⲛⲁⲓ ⲧⲏⲣⲟⲩ ⲉⲧϩⲓⲟⲩⲓ̀ ⲉ̀ⲡⲓⲅⲁⲍⲟⲫⲩⲗⲁⲕⲓⲟⲛ.
43 فَدَعَا تَلَامِيذَهُ وَقَالَ لَهُمُ: " الْحَقَّ أَقُولُ لَكُمْ: إِنَّ هَذِهِ الْأَرْمَلَةَ الْفَقِيرَةَ قَدْ أَلْقَتْ أَكْثَرَ مِنْ جَمِيعِ الَّذِينَ أَلْقَوْا فِي الْخِزَانَةِ؛
44 for they all put in out of their abundance, but she out of her poverty put in all that she had, her whole livelihood.”
Ⲟⲩⲟⲛ ⲅⲁⲣ ⲛⲓⲃⲉⲛ ⲉ̀ⲧⲁⲩϩⲓⲟⲩⲓ̀ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗϧⲉⲛ ⲡⲉⲧⲉⲣϩⲟⲩⲟ̀ ⲉ̀ⲣⲱⲟⲩ ⲑⲁⲓ ⲇⲉ ⲛ̀ⲑⲟⲥ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗϧⲉⲛ ⲡⲉⲧⲉⲥⲉⲣϧⲁⲉ̀ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟϥ ϩⲱⲃ ⲛⲓⲃⲉⲛ ⲉ̀ⲧⲉⲛ̀ⲧⲁⲥ ⲁⲥϩⲓⲧⲟⲩ ⲡⲉⲥⲱⲛϧ ⲧⲏⲣϥ.
44 لِأَنَّ الْجَمِيعَ مِنْ فَضْلَتِهِمْ أَلْقَوْا. وَأَمَّا هَذِهِ فَمِنْ إِعْوَازِهَا أَلْقَتْ كُلَّ مَا عِنْدَهَا، كُلَّ مَعِيشَتِهَا ".