Stand in the fear of God and listen to the Holy Gospel. A reading from the Gospel according to our teacher Saint Mark the Evangelist, and the pure disciple. May his blessings be with us all.
قِفُوا بِخَوْفِ اللهِ، وَأَنْصِتُوا لِسَمَاعِ الإِنْجِيلِ الْمُقَدَّسِ. فَصْلٌ مِنْ بِشَارَةِ الإِنْجِيلِ لِمُعَلِّمِنَا مَارْ مرقس الْبَشِيرِ، التِّلْمِيذِ الطَّاهِرِ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
From the Psalms of our teacher David the prophet. May his blessings be with us all.
مِنْ مَزَامِيرِ تَرَاتِيلِ مُعَلِّمِنَا دَاوُدَ النَّبِيِّ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
Vespers Psalm
المزمور
	Psalms 9:7,10
(مزامير 9: 7,10)
Sing praises to the Lord, who dwells in Zion! Declare His deeds among the people. That I may tell of all Your praise In the gates of the daughter of Zion.
Ⲁ̀ⲣⲓⲯⲁⲗⲓⲛ ⲉ̀Ⲡⲟ︦ⲥ︦ ⲫⲏⲉⲧϣⲟⲡ ϧⲉⲛ Ⲥⲓⲱⲛ: ⲥⲁϫⲓ ⲛ̀ⲛⲉϥϩ̀ⲃⲓⲟⲩⲓ̀ ⲧⲏⲣⲟⲩ ϧⲉⲛ ⲛⲓⲉⲑⲛⲟⲥ: ϩⲟⲡⲱⲥ ⲛ̀ⲧⲁⲥⲁϫⲓ ⲛ̀ⲛⲉⲕⲥ̀ⲙⲟⲩ ⲧⲏⲣⲟⲩ: ϧⲉⲛ ⲛⲓⲡⲩⲗⲏ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲧ̀ϣⲉⲣⲓ ⲛ̀Ⲥⲓⲱⲛ. ⲁ︦ⲗ︦.
رَتِّلُوا لِلرَّبِّ السَّاكِنِ في صِهْيَوْنَ، وَأَخْبِرُوا في الأُمَمِ بِأعْمَالِهِ. لِكَيْ مَا أُخْبِرَ بِجَمِيعِ تَسَابِيحِكَ، في أبْوَابِ ابْنَةِ صِهْيَوْنَ. هَلِّلُويَا.
People:
Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
الليلويا.
	Psalm Trailer for the Pope or a Bishop
(Ⲙⲁⲣⲟⲩϭⲁⲥϥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲧ̀ⲉⲕⲕ̀ⲗⲏⲥⲓⲁ̀...)
People:
Amen Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲙⲏⲛ Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
امين الليلويا.
Then the introduction to the Gospel is read.
ثم تقال مقدمة الأنجيل وهي:
Reader:
Blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord. Our Lord, God, Savior and King of us all, Jesus Christ, Son of the living God to whom is glory forever. Amen.
القارﺉُ:
مباركٌ الآتي باسمِ الربِّ إلهِ القواتِ، ربُّنا وإلهُنا ومخلصُنا وملكُنا كلِّنا، يسوعُ المسيحُ، ابنُ اللهِ الحيِّ، الذي لهُ المجدُ إلى الأبدِ. آمين.
Vespers Gospel
الإنجيل
	Mark 14:3-9
(مرقس 14: 3-9)
3 And being in Bethany at the house of Simon the leper, as He sat at the table, a woman came having an alabaster flask of very costly oil of spikenard. Then she broke the flask and poured it on His head.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉϥⲭⲏ ϧⲉⲛ Ⲃⲏⲑⲁⲛⲓⲁ̀ ϧⲉⲛ ⲡ̀ⲏⲓ ⲛ̀Ⲥⲓⲙⲱⲛ ⲡⲓⲕⲁⲕⲥⲉϩⲧ ⲉϥⲣⲱⲧⲉⲃ ⲁⲥⲓ̀ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲟⲩⲥ̀ϩⲓⲙⲓ ⲉ̀ⲣⲉ ⲟⲩⲟⲛ ⲟⲩⲙⲟⲕⲓ ⲛ̀ⲥⲟϫⲉⲛ ⲛⲛⲁⲣⲇⲟⲥ ⲛ̀ⲧⲟⲧⲥ ⲙ̀ⲡⲓⲥ̀ⲧⲓⲕⲏⲉ̀ⲛⲁϣⲉ ⲛ̀ⲥⲟⲩⲉⲛϥ ⲉ̀ⲁⲥϧⲟⲙϧⲉⲙ ⲙ̀ⲡⲓⲙⲟⲕⲓ ⲉ̀ⲁⲥϫⲟϣϥ ⲉ̀ϫⲉⲛ ⲧⲉϥⲁ̀ⲫⲉ
3 وَفِيمَا كَانَ في بَيْتِ عَنْيَا في بَيْتِ سِمْعَانَ الْأَبْرَصِ مُتَّكِئًا، جَاءَتِ امْرَأَةٌ مَعَهَا قَارُورَةُ طِيبِ نَارِدِينٍ خَالِصٍ كَثِيرِ الثَّمَنِ فَكَسَرَتِ القَارُورَةَ وَسَكَبَتْهُ عَلَى رَأْسِهِ.
4 But there were some who were indignant among themselves, and said, “Why was this fragrant oil wasted?
Ⲛⲁⲣⲉ ϩⲁⲛⲟⲩⲟⲛ ⲇⲉ ⲭ̀ⲣⲉⲙⲣⲉⲙ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲛ̀ⲛⲟⲩⲉ̀ⲣⲏⲟⲩ ⲉⲩϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ϫⲉ ⲉⲑⲃⲉ ⲟⲩ ⲁⲡⲁⲓⲧⲁⲕⲟ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲡⲁⲓⲥⲟϫⲉⲛ ϣⲱⲡⲓ.
4 وَكَانَ قَوْمٌ قَدْ تَذَمَّرُوا فِيمَا بَيْنَهُمْ، قَائِلينَ: " لِمَاذَا كَانَ إِتْلافُ هَذَا الطِّيبِ؟
5 For it might have been sold for more than three hundred denarii and given to the poor.” And they criticized her sharply.
Ⲛⲉ ⲟⲩⲟⲛϣ̀ϫⲟⲙ ⲅⲁⲣ ⲉ̀ϯ ⲙ̀ⲫⲁⲓ ⲉ̀ⲃⲟⲗ ⲥⲁⲡ̀ϣⲱⲓ ⲛ̀ⲧ︦ ⲛ̀ⲥⲁⲑⲉⲣⲓ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲟⲩⲧⲏⲓⲧⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ⲛⲓϩⲏⲕⲓ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲛⲁⲩⲙ̀ⲃⲟⲛ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟⲥ ⲡⲉ.
5 فَإِنَّهُ كَانَ يُمْكِنُ أَنْ يُبَاعَ هَذَا بِأَكْثَرَ مِنْ ثَلاثِ مِئَةِ دِينَارٍ وَتُعْطَى لِلْمَسَاكِينِ ". وَكَانُوا يُؤَنِّبُونَها.
6 But Jesus said, “Let her alone. Why do you trouble her? She has done a good work for Me.
Ⲓⲏ︦ⲥ︦ ⲇⲉ ⲡⲉϫⲁϥ ⲛⲱⲟⲩ ϫⲉ ⲭⲁⲥ ⲁ̀ϧⲱⲧⲉⲛ ⲧⲉⲧⲉⲛϯϧⲓⲥⲓ ⲛⲁⲥ ⲟⲩϩⲱⲃ ⲅⲁⲣ ⲉ̀ⲛⲁⲛⲉϥ ⲉ̀ⲧⲁⲥⲉⲣϩⲱⲃ ⲉ̀ⲣⲟϥ ⲛ̀ϧⲏⲧ.
6 أَمَّا يَسُوعُ فَقَالَ لَهُمْ: " اتْرُكُوهَا! لِمَاذا تُزْعِجُونَهَا؟ قَدْ عَمِلَتْ بِي عَمَلًا حَسَنًا!.
7 For you have the poor with you always, and whenever you wish you may do them good; but Me you do not have always.
Ⲛ̀ⲥⲏⲟⲩ ⲛⲓⲃⲉⲛ ⲛⲓϩⲏⲕⲓ ⲥⲉ̀ⲛⲉⲙⲱⲧⲉⲛ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉ̀ϣⲱⲡ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉⲧⲉⲛⲟⲩⲱϣ ⲟⲩⲟⲛϣ̀ϫⲟⲙ ⲙ̀ⲙⲱⲧⲉⲛ ⲉ̀ⲉⲣⲡⲉⲑⲛⲁⲛⲉϥ ⲛⲱⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ⲥⲏⲟⲩ ⲛⲓⲃⲉⲛ ⲁ̀ⲛⲟⲕ ⲇⲉ ϯⲛⲉⲙⲱⲧⲉⲛ ⲛ̀ⲥⲏⲟⲩ ⲛⲓⲃⲉⲛ ⲁⲛ.
7 لِأَنَّ الْفُقَرَاءَ مَعَكُمْ في كُلِّ حِينٍ وَمَتَى أَرَدْتُمْ تَقْدِرُونَ أَنْ تَصْنَعُوا مَعَهُمْ خَيْرًا كُلَّ حِينٍ. وَأَمَّا أَنَا فَلَسْتُ مَعَكُمْ في كُلِّ حِينٍ.
8 She has done what she could. She has come beforehand to anoint My body for burial.
Ⲫⲏⲉ̀ⲧⲁⲥϭⲓⲧϥ ⲁⲥⲁⲓϥ ⲁⲥⲉⲣϣⲟⲣⲡ ⲅⲁⲣ ⲛ̀ⲑⲁϩⲥ ⲡⲁⲥⲱⲙⲁ ⲙ̀ⲡⲁⲓⲥⲟϫⲉⲛ ⲉ̀ⲡ̀ϫⲓⲛⲕⲟⲥⲧ.
8 فَمَا كَانَ لَهَا قَدْ فَعَلَتْهُ لِأَنَّهَا سَبَقَتْ فَدَهَنَتْ بِالطِّيبِ جَسَدِي لِدَفْنِي.
9 Assuredly, I say to you, wherever this gospel is preached in the whole world, what this woman has done will also be told as a memorial to her.”
Ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ ϯϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ⲛⲱⲧⲉⲛ ϫⲉ ⲡⲓⲙⲁ ⲉⲧⲟⲩⲛⲁϩⲓⲱⲓϣ ⲙ̀ⲡⲁⲓⲉⲩⲁⲅⲅⲗⲓⲟⲛ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟϥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲡⲓⲕⲟⲥⲙⲟⲥ ⲧⲏⲣϥ ⲫⲏⲱϥ ⲉ̀ⲧⲉ ⲑⲁⲓ ⲁⲓϥ ⲉⲩⲉ̀ⲥⲁϫⲓ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟϥ ⲉⲩⲙⲉⲩⲓ ⲛⲁⲥ.
9 الْحَقَّ أَقُولُ لَكُمْ: إِنَّهُ حَيْثُمَا يُكْرَزْ بِهَذَا الْإِنْجِيلِ في كُلِّ الْعَالَمِ، يُخْبَرْ أَيْضًا بِمَا صَنَعَتْهُ هَذِهِ، تَذْكَارًا لَهَا ".