Prophecies
النبوآت
	Isaiah 2:3-11
(اشعياء 2: 3-11)
A reading from Isaiah, the prophet. May his holy blessings be with us. Amen.
Ⲉⲃⲟⲗϧⲉⲛ Ⲏⲥⲁⲏ̀ⲁⲥ ⲡⲓⲡ̀ⲣⲟⲫⲏⲧⲏⲥ: ⲉ̀ⲣⲉⲡⲉϥⲥ̀ⲙⲟⲩ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ ϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲛⲉⲙⲁⲛ ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ ⲉϥϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ:
من اشعياء النبي بركته المقدسة تكون معنا. آمين.
3 Many people shall come and say, “Come, and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, To the house of the God of Jacob; He will teach us His ways, And we shall walk in His paths.” For out of Zion shall go forth the law, And the word of the Lord from Jerusalem.
3 وَيَنْطَلِقُ شُعُوبٌ كَثِيرُونَ، وَيَقُولُونَ هَلُمُّوا نَصْعَدُ إِلَى جَبَلِ الرَّبِّ، إِلَى بَيْتِ إلَهِ يَعْقُوبَ، وَهُوَ يُعَلِّمُنَا طُرُقَهُ فَنَسْلُكُ فِي سُبُلِهِ. لِأَنَّهُ مِنْ صِهْيَوْنَ تَخْرُجُ الشَّرِيعَةُ، وَمِنْ أُورُشَلِيمَ كَلِمَةُ الرَّبِّ.
4 He shall judge between the nations, And rebuke many people; They shall beat their swords into plowshares, And their spears into pruning hooks; Nation shall not lift up sword against nation, Neither shall they learn war anymore.
4 وَيَحْكُمُ بِالْعَدْلِ بَيْنَ الْأُمَمِ وَيَقْضِي لِلشُّعُوبٍ الْكَثِيرِينَ، فَيَضْرِبُونَ سُيُوفَهُمْ سِكَكًا لِلْأَفْدِنَةِ وَرِمَاحَهُمْ مَنَاجِلَ، فَلَا تَرْفَعُ أُمَّةٌ عَلَى أُمَّةٍ سَيْفًا، وَلَا يَتَعَلَّمُونَ الْحَرْبَ فِي مَا بَعْدُ.
5 O house of Jacob, come and let us walk In the light of the Lord.
5 هَلُمُّوا يَا بَيْتَ يَعْقُوبَ لِنَسْلُكْ فِي نُورِ الرَّبِّ.
6 For You have forsaken Your people, the house of Jacob, Because they are filled with eastern ways; They are soothsayers like the Philistines, And they are pleased with the children of foreigners.
6 إِنَّكَ رَفَضْتَ شَعْبَكَ بَيْتَ إِسْرَائِيلَ؛ لِأَنَّ كُوَرَهُمْ قَد اِمْتَلأَتْ مِنَ الذُّنُوبِ مُنْذُ الْقَدِيمِ يَتَطَيَّرُونَ كَالْفِلِسْطِينِيِّينَ، وَقَبَّلُوا كَثِيرِينَ مِنْ أَبْنَاءِ الْغُرَبَاءِ.
7 Their land is also full of silver and gold, And there is no end to their treasures; Their land is also full of horses, And there is no end to their chariots.
7 قَدِ اِمْتَلَأَتْ أَرْضُهُمْ فِضَّةً وَذَهَبًا وَلَا حَدَّ لِكُنُوزِهِمْ. قَدِ اِمْتَلَأَتْ أَرْضُهُمْ خَيْلًا فَلَا نِهَايَةَ لِمَرْكَبَاتِهِمْ.
8 Their land is also full of idols; They worship the work of their own hands, That which their own fingers have made.
8 قَدِ اِمْتَلَأَتْ أَرْضُهُمْ أَصْنَامًا، فَيَسْجُدُونَ لِمَصْنُوعَاتِ أَيدِيهِمْ لِمَا صَنَعَتْهُ أَصَابِعُهُمْ،
9 People bow down, And each man humbles himself; Therefore do not forgive them.
9 فَلِذَلِكَ سَيَنْخَفِضُ الْبَشَرُ، وَيَنْطَرِحُ الْإِنْسانُ فَلَا تَغْفِرْ لَهُمْ.
10 Enter into the rock, and hide in the dust, From the terror of the Lord And the glory of His majesty.
10 الْآنَ أَدْخُلُ فِي الصَّخْرِ وَأَخْتَبِئُ فِي التُّرَابِ مِنْ أَمَامِ هَيْبَةِ الرَّبِّ وَمِنْ بَهَاءِ عَظَمَتِهِ.
11 The lofty looks of man shall be humbled, The haughtiness of men shall be bowed down, And the Lord alone shall be exalted in that day.
11 إِنَّ عُيُونَ الْبَشَرِ الْمُتَشَامِخَةَ سَتُخْفَضُ، وَتَرَفُّعَ الْإِنْسَانِ سَيُوْضَعُ، وَيَتَعَالَى الرَّبُّ وَحْدَهُ فِي ذَلِكَ الْيَوْمِ.
Glory be to the Holy Trinity, our God, forever and unto the ages of all ages. Amen.
Ⲟⲩⲱ̀ⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ϯⲧ̀ⲣⲓⲁⲥ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ Ⲡⲉⲛⲛⲟⲩϯ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛⲉⲙ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲛⲓⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲧⲏⲣⲟⲩ: ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ.
مجداً للثالوث القدوس إلهنا الى أبد الآبدين كلها آمين.
	Joel 2:12-26
(يوئيل 2: 12-26)
A reading from Joel, the prophet. May his holy blessings be with us. Amen.
Ⲉⲃⲟⲗϧⲉⲛ Ⲓⲟⲩⲏⲗ ⲡⲓⲡ̀ⲣⲟⲫⲏⲧⲏⲥ: ⲉ̀ⲣⲉⲡⲉϥⲥ̀ⲙⲟⲩ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ ϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲛⲉⲙⲁⲛ ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ ⲉϥϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ:
من يوئيل النبي بركته المقدسة تكون معنا. آمين.
12 “Now, therefore,” says the Lord, “Turn to Me with all your heart, With fasting, with weeping, and with mourning.”
12 فَالْآنَ، يَقُولُ الرَّبُّ، اِرْجِعُوا إِلَيَّ بِكُلِّ قُلُوبِكُمْ، وَبِالصَّوْمِ وَالْبُكَاءِ وَالاِنْتِحَابِ،
13 So rend your heart, and not your garments; Return to the Lord your God, For He is gracious and merciful, Slow to anger, and of great kindness; And He relents from doing harm.
13 وَمَزِّقُوا قُلُوبَكُمْ لَا ثِيَابَكُمْ، وَارْجِعُوا إِلَى الرَّبِّ إِلَهِكُمْ لِأَنَّهُ رَؤُوفٌ رَحِيمٌ، طَوِيلُ الْأَنَاةِ وَكَثِيرُ الرَّحْمَةِ وَيَنْدَمُ عَلَى الشَّرِّ.
14 Who knows if He will turn and relent, And leave a blessing behind Him— A grain offering and a drink offering For the Lord your God?
14 لَعَلَّهُ يَرْجعُ وَيَنْدَمُ، وَيُبْقِيَ وَرَاءَهُ بَرَكَةً، وَتَقْدِمَةً وَسَكِيبًا لِلرَّبِّ إِلَهِكُمْ.
15 Blow the trumpet in Zion, Consecrate a fast, Call a sacred assembly;
15 اُنْفُخُوا بِالْبُوقِ فِي صِهْيَوْنَ. وَقَدِّسُوا الصَّوْمَ. وَنَادُوا بِاحْتِفَالٍ.
16 Gather the people, Sanctify the congregation, Assemble the elders, Gather the children and nursing babes; Let the bridegroom go out from his chamber, And the bride from her dressing room.
16 اِجْمَعُوا الشَّعْبَ. وَقَدِّسُوا الْجَمَاعَةَ. واحْشُدُوا الشُّيُوخَ. وَاجْمَعُوا الأَطْفَالَ، وَرَاضِعِي الْأَثْدَاءِ. وَلِيَخْرُجِ الْعَرِيسُ مِنْ مَخْدَعِهِ وَالْعَرُوسُ مِنْ حَجْلَتِهَا.
17 Let the priests, who minister to the Lord, Weep between the porch and the altar; Let them say, “Spare Your people, O Lord, And do not give Your heritage to reproach, That the nations should rule over them. Why should they say among the peoples, ‘Where is their God?’”
17 بَيْنَ الرِّوَاقِ وَالْمَذْبَحِ يَبْكِي الْكَهَنَةُ خُدَّامُ الْمَذْبَحِ، وَيَقُولُونَ: " اِشفِقْ يَا رَبُّ عَلَى شَعْبِكَ، وَلَا تَجْعَلْ مِيرَاثَكَ عَارًا حَتَّى تَجْعَلَهُمُ الْأُمَمُ مَثَلًا. فَلِمَاذَا يَقُولُونَ فِي الشُّعُوبِ: أَيْنَ إِلَهُهُمْ؟ ".
18 Then the Lord will be zealous for His land, And pity His people.
18 لَقَدْ غَارَ الرَّبُّ عَلَى أَرْضِهِ وَرَقَّ لِشَعْبِهِ.
19 The Lord will answer and say to His people, “Behold, I will send you grain and new wine and oil, And you will be satisfied by them; I will no longer make you a reproach among the nations.
19 وَأَجَابَ الرَّبُّ وَقَالَ لِشَعْبِهِ: " هَأَنَذَا مُرْسِلٌ إِلَيْكُمْ الْقَمْحَ وَالنَّبِيْذَ وَالزَّيْتَ فَتَشْبَعُونَ مِنْهَا، وَلَا أَجْعَلُكُمْ مِنْ بَعْدُ عَارًا فِي الْأُمَمِ.
20 “But I will remove far from you the northern army, And will drive him away into a barren and desolate land, With his face toward the eastern sea And his back toward the western sea; His stench will come up, And his foul odor will rise, Because he has done monstrous things.”
20 بَلْ أُبْعِدُ الشَّمالِيَّ عَنْكُمْ، وَأَطْرُدُهُ إِلَى أَرْضٍ مُقْفِرَةٍ مُسْتَوْحِشَةٍ. وَوَجْهُهُ إِلَى الْبَحْرِ الشَّرْقِيِّ، وَمُؤَخَّرُهُ إِلَى الْبَحْرِ الْغَرْبِيِّ، فَيَصْعَدُ نَتَنُهُ وَيَنْبَعِثُ زَهَمُهُ، لِأَنَّهُ تَعَاظَمَ فِي عَمَلِهِ ".
21 Fear not, O land; Be glad and rejoice, For the Lord has done marvelous things!
21 لَا تَخَافِي أَيَّتُهَا الْأَرْضُ. اِبْتَهِجِي وَافْرَحِي فَإِنَّ الرَّبَّ قَدْ تَعَاظَمَ فِي عَمَلِهِ.
22 Do not be afraid, you beasts of the field; For the open pastures are springing up, And the tree bears its fruit; The fig tree and the vine yield their strength.
22 لَا تَخَافِي يَا بَهَائِمَ الصَّحْرَاءِ، فَإِنَّ مَرَاتِعَ الْبَرِّيَّةِ قَدْ نَبَتَتْ، وَالشَّجَرُ أَنْشَأَ ثَمَرَهُ، وَالتِّينَةُ وَالْكَرْمَةُ بَذَلَا قُوَّتَهُمَا.
23 Be glad then, you children of Zion, And rejoice in the Lord your God; For He has given you the former rain faithfully, And He will cause the rain to come down for you— The former rain, And the latter rain in the first month.
23 وَأَنْتُمْ يَا بَنِي صِهْيَوْنَ، ابْتَهِجُوا وَافْرَحُوا بِالرَّبِّ إِلَهِكُمْ، لِأَنَّهُ قَدْ أَعْطَاكُمْ مُشْتَرَعَ الْعَدْلِ، وَأَنْزَلَ لَكُمُ الْمَطَرَ الْمُبَكِّرَ والْمُتَأَخِّرَ فِي أَوَانِهِ،
24 The threshing floors shall be full of wheat, And the vats shall overflow with new wine and oil.
24 فَتَمْتَلِئُ الْبَيَادِرُ حِنْطَةً، وَتَفِيضُ الْمَعَاصِرُ نَبِيْذًا وَزَيْتًا.
25 “So I will restore to you the years that the swarming locust has eaten, The crawling locust, The consuming locust, And the chewing locust, My great army which I sent among you.
25 وَأُعَوِّضُ لَكُمْ عَنِ السِّنِينَ الَّتِي أَكَلَهَا الْجَرَادُ، وَالْجُنْدَبُ وَالدُّبَى وَالزَّحَّافُ، جَيْشِيَ الْعَظِيمُ الَّذِي أَرْسَلْتَهُ عَلَيْكُمْ.
26 You shall eat in plenty and be satisfied, And praise the name of the Lord your God, Who has dealt wondrously with you; And My people shall never be put to shame.
26 فَتَأْكُلُونَ أَكْلًا وَتَشْبَعُونَ وَتُسَبِّحُونَ اسْمَ الرَّبِّ إِلَهِكُمُ الَّذِي صَنَعَ مَعَكُمُ الْعَجَائِبَ، وَلَا يَخْزَى شَعْبِي إِلَى الْأَبَدِ.
Glory be to the Holy Trinity, our God, forever and unto the ages of all ages. Amen.
Ⲟⲩⲱ̀ⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ϯⲧ̀ⲣⲓⲁⲥ ⲉⲑⲟⲩⲁⲃ Ⲡⲉⲛⲛⲟⲩϯ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛⲉⲙ ϣⲁ ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲛⲓⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ ⲧⲏⲣⲟⲩ: ⲁ̀ⲙⲏⲛ.
مجداً للثالوث القدوس إلهنا الى أبد الآبدين كلها آمين.