Stand in the fear of God and listen to the Holy Gospel. A reading from the Gospel according to our teacher Saint Luke the Evangelist, and the pure disciple. May his blessings be with us all.
قِفُوا بِخَوْفِ اللهِ، وَأَنْصِتُوا لِسَمَاعِ الإِنْجِيلِ الْمُقَدَّسِ. فَصْلٌ مِنْ بِشَارَةِ الإِنْجِيلِ لِمُعَلِّمِنَا مَارْ لوقا الْبَشِيرِ، التِّلْمِيذِ الطَّاهِرِ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
From the Psalms of our teacher David the prophet. May his blessings be with us all.
مِنْ مَزَامِيرِ تَرَاتِيلِ مُعَلِّمِنَا دَاوُدَ النَّبِيِّ، بَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِنَا.
Matins Psalm
المزمور
	Psalms 24:5-6
(مزامير 24: 5-6)
Remember, O Lord, Your tender mercies and Your lovingkindnesses, For they are from of old. Do not remember the sins of my youth, nor my transgressions.
Ⲁ̀ⲣⲓⲫ̀ⲙⲉⲩⲓ̀ Ⲡⲟ︦ⲥ︦ ⲛ̀ⲛⲉⲕⲙⲉⲧϣⲉⲛϩⲏⲧ ⲛⲉⲙ ⲛⲉⲕⲛⲁⲓ: ϫⲉ ⲥⲉϣⲟⲡ ⲓⲥϫⲉⲛ ⲡ̀ⲉ̀ⲛⲉϩ: ⲛⲓⲛⲟⲃⲓ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲧⲁⲙⲉⲧⲁ̀ⲗⲟⲩ: ⲛⲉⲙ ⲛⲁⲧⲁⲙⲉⲧⲁⲧⲉ̀ⲙⲓ ⲛ̀ⲛⲉⲕⲉⲣⲡⲟⲩⲙⲉⲩⲓ̀: ⲁ︦ⲗ︦.
اُذْكُرْ يَا رَبُّ رَأْفَاتِكَ وَمَرَاحِمَكَ، فَإِنَّهَا ثَابِتَةٌ مُنْذُ الْأَزَلِ. خَطَايَا صِبَايَ، وَجَهَالَاتِي فَلَا تَذْكُرْهَا.
People:
Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
الليلويا.
	Psalm Trailer for the Pope or a Bishop
(Ⲙⲁⲣⲟⲩϭⲁⲥϥ ϧⲉⲛ ⲧ̀ⲉⲕⲕ̀ⲗⲏⲥⲓⲁ̀...)
People:
Amen Alleluia.
Ⲡⲓⲗⲁⲟⲥ:
Ⲁⲙⲏⲛ Ⲁⲗⲗⲏⲗⲟⲩⲓⲁ.
الشعبُ:
امين الليلويا.
Then the introduction to the Gospel is read.
ثم تقال مقدمة الأنجيل وهي:
Reader:
Blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord. Our Lord, God, Savior and King of us all, Jesus Christ, Son of the living God to whom is glory forever. Amen.
القارﺉُ:
مباركٌ الآتي باسمِ الربِّ إلهِ القواتِ، ربُّنا وإلهُنا ومخلصُنا وملكُنا كلِّنا، يسوعُ المسيحُ، ابنُ اللهِ الحيِّ، الذي لهُ المجدُ إلى الأبدِ. آمين.
Matins Gospel
الإنجيل
	Luke 6:24-34
(لوقا 6: 24-34)
24 “But woe to you who are rich, For you have received your consolation.
Ⲡ̀ⲗⲏⲛ ⲟⲩⲟⲓ ⲛⲱⲧⲉⲛ ϧⲁ ⲛⲓⲣⲁⲙⲁⲟ̀ ϫⲉ ⲁⲣⲉⲧⲉⲛⲕⲏⲛ ⲉⲣⲉⲧⲉⲛϭⲓ ⲙⲡⲉⲧⲉⲛϯϩⲟ.
24 لَكِنْ الْوَيْلُ لَكُمْ أَيُّهَا الْأَغْنِيَاءُ، فَإِنَّكُمْ قَدْ نِلْتُمْ عَزَاءَكُمْ.
25 Woe to you who are full, For you shall hunger. Woe to you who laugh now, For you shall mourn and weep.
Ⲟⲩⲟⲓ ⲛⲱⲧⲉⲛ ϧⲁ ⲛⲏⲉⲧⲥⲏⲟⲩ ϯⲛⲟⲩ ϫⲉ ⲧⲉⲧⲉⲛⲛⲁϩ̀ⲕⲟ ⲟⲩⲟⲓ ⲛⲱⲧⲉⲛ ϧⲁ ⲛⲏⲉⲧⲥⲱⲃⲓ ϯⲛⲟⲩ ϫⲉ ⲧⲉⲧⲉⲛⲛⲁⲉⲣϩⲏⲃⲓ ⲩⲟϩ ⲧⲉⲧⲉⲛⲛⲁⲣⲓⲙⲓ.
25 الْوَيْلُ لَكُمْ أَيُّهَا الشَّبَاعَى، فَإِنَّكُمْ سَتَجُوعُونَ. الْوَيْلُ لَكُمْ أَيُّهَا الضَّاحِكُونَ الْآنَ، فَإِنَّكُمْ سَتَنُوحُونَ وَتَبْكُونَ.
26 Woe to you when all men speak well of you, For so did their fathers to the false prophets.
Ⲟⲩⲟⲓ ⲛⲱⲧⲉⲛ ⲉϣⲱⲡ ⲁⲩϣⲁⲛϫⲟⲥ ⲉ̀ⲣⲱⲧⲉⲛ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲛⲓⲣⲱⲙⲓ ⲧⲏⲣⲟⲩ ϫⲉ ⲕⲁⲗⲱⲥ ⲛⲁⲓ ⲅⲁⲣ ⲟⲛ ⲙ̀ⲡⲁⲓⲣⲏϯ ⲉ̀ⲛⲁⲩⲓ̀ⲣⲓ ⲙⲙⲱⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ⲛⲓⲡⲣⲟⲫⲏⲧⲏⲥ ⲛ̀ⲛⲟⲩϫ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲛⲟⲩⲓⲟϯ.
26 الْوَيْلُ لَكُمْ إِذَا قَالَ النَّاسُ فِيكُمْ حَسَنًا. فَإِنَّ آبَاءَهُمْ هَكَذَا فَعَلُوا بِالْأَنْبِياءِ الْكَذَبَةِ.
27 “But I say to you who hear: Love your enemies, do good to those who hate you,
Ⲁⲗⲗⲁ ϯϫⲱ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲥ ⲛⲱⲧⲉⲛ ϧⲁ ⲛⲏⲉⲧⲥⲱⲧⲉⲙ ϫⲉ ⲙⲉⲛⲣⲉ ⲛⲉⲧⲉⲛϫⲁϫⲓ ⲁⲣⲓ ⲉⲑⲛⲁⲛⲉϥ ⲛ̀ⲛⲏⲉⲑⲙⲟⲥϯ ⲙ̀ⲙⲱⲧⲉⲛ.
27 لَكِنِّي أَقُولُ لَكُمْ أَيُّهَا السَّامِعُونَ: أَحِبُّوا أَعْدَاءَكُمْ، أَحْسِنُوا إِلَى مُبْغِضِيكُمْ،
28 bless those who curse you, and pray for those who spitefully use you.
Ⲥ̀ⲙⲟⲩ ⲉ̀ⲛⲏⲉⲧⲥⲁϩⲟⲩⲓ̀ ⲉ̀ⲣⲱⲧⲉⲛ ⲧⲱⲃϩ ⲉ̀ϫⲉⲛ ⲛⲏⲉⲧϭⲟϫⲓ ⲛ̀ⲥⲁ ⲑⲏⲛⲟⲩ.
28 بَارِكُوا لَاعِنِيكُمْ، صَلُّوا لِأَجْلِ الَّذِينَ يَضْطَهِدُونَكُمْ.
29 To him who strikes you on the one cheek, offer the other also. And from him who takes away your cloak, do not withhold your tunic either.
Ⲫⲏⲉⲑⲛⲁϩⲓⲟⲩⲓ̀ ⲉⲛ ⲧⲁⲓⲟⲩⲟϫⲓ ⲭⲁ ϯⲭⲉϯ ϧⲁⲧⲟⲧϥ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲫⲏⲉⲑⲛⲁⲱⲗⲓ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉⲕϩ̀ⲃⲟⲥ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉⲣⲧⲁϩⲛⲟ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟϥ ⲉ̀ⲱⲗⲓ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉⲕⲕⲉϣ̀ⲑⲏ ⲛ.
29 مَنْ لَطَمَكَ عَلَى خَدِّكَ فَحَوِّلْ لَهُ الْآخَرَ، وَمَنْ أَخَذَ رِدَاءَكَ فَلَا تَمْنَعْهُ مِنْ أَنْ يَأْخُذَ ثَوْبَكَ أَيْضًا.
30 Give to everyone who asks of you. And from him who takes away your goods do not ask them back.
Ⲟⲩⲟⲛ ⲇⲉ ⲛⲓⲃⲉⲛ ⲑⲛⲁⲉⲣⲉⲧⲓⲛ ⲙ̀ⲙⲟⲕ ⲙⲟⲓ ⲛⲁϥ ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲫⲏⲉⲑⲛⲁⲉⲗ ⲛⲉⲧⲉⲛⲟⲩⲕ ⲙ̀ⲡⲉⲣϣⲁⲧϥ ⲙ̀ⲙⲱⲟⲩ.
30 وَكُلُّ مَنْ سَأَلَكَ فَأَعْطِهِ، وَمَنْ أَخَذَ الَّذِي لَكَ فَلَا تُطَالِبْهُ.
31 And just as you want men to do to you, you also do to them likewise.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲕⲁⲧⲁⲫ̀ⲣⲏϯ ⲉⲧⲉⲧⲉⲛⲟⲩⲱϣ ⲛ̀ⲧⲟⲩⲓ̀ⲣⲓ ⲱⲧⲉⲛ ⲛ̀ϫⲉ ⲛⲓⲣⲱⲙⲓ ⲁⲣⲓⲟⲩⲓ̀ ⲛⲱⲟⲩ ϩⲱⲧⲉⲛ ⲙ̀ⲡⲁⲓⲣⲏϯ.
31 وَكَمَا تُرِيدُونَ أَنْ يَفْعَلَ النَّاسُ بِكُمُ، اِفْعَلُوا أَنْتُمْ أَيْضًا بِهِمْ هَكَذَا.
32 “But if you love those who love you, what credit is that to you? For even sinners love those who love them.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲓⲥϫⲉ ⲁⲣⲉⲧⲉⲛⲛⲁⲙⲉⲛⲣⲉ ⲛⲏⲉⲑⲙⲉⲓ ⲙ̀ⲙⲱⲧⲉⲛ ⲁϣ ⲡⲉ ⲡⲉⲧⲉⲛϩ̀ⲙⲟⲧ ⲕⲉ ⲁⲣ ⲛⲓⲕⲉⲣⲉϥⲉⲣⲛⲟⲃⲓ ⲁⲩⲙⲉⲓ ⲛ̀ⲛⲏⲉⲑⲙⲉⲓ ⲙ̀ⲙⲱⲟⲩ.
32 وَإِنْ أَحْبَبْتُمُ الَّذِينَ يُحِبُّونَكُمْ، فَمَا هُوَ أَجْرُكُمْ؟ فَإِنَّ الْخُطَاةَ أَيْضًا يُحِبُّونَ مَنْ يُحِبُّهُمْ.
33 And if you do good to those who do good to you, what credit is that to you? For even sinners do the same.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉϣⲱⲡ ⲁⲣⲉⲧⲉⲛⲛⲁⲉⲣ ⲡⲉⲑⲛⲁⲛⲉϥ ⲛ̀ⲛⲏⲉⲧⲉⲣ ⲡⲉⲑⲛⲁⲛⲉϥ ⲛⲉⲙⲱⲧⲉⲛ ⲁϣ ⲡⲉ ⲡⲉⲧⲉⲛϩ̀ⲙⲟⲧ ⲛⲓⲕⲉⲣⲉϥⲉⲣⲛⲟⲃⲓ ⲥⲉⲓ̀ⲣⲓ ⲙ̀ⲡⲁⲓⲣⲏϯ.
33 وَإِذَا صَنَعْتُمُ الْخَيْرَ مَعَ الَّذِينَ يُحْسِنُونَ إِلَيْكُمْ، فَمَا هُوَ فَضْلُكُمْ؟ فَإِنَّ الْخُطَاةَ يَفْعَلُونَ هَكَذَا.
34 And if you lend to those from whom you hope to receive back, what credit is that to you? For even sinners lend to sinners to receive as much back.
Ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲉϣⲱⲡ ⲁⲣⲉⲧⲉⲛϣⲁⲛⲉⲣⲇⲁⲛⲓⲍⲓⲛ ⲛ̀ϩⲁⲛⲟⲩⲟⲛ ⲉⲣⲉⲧⲉⲛϩⲉⲗⲡⲓⲥ ⲉ̀ϭⲓ ⲛ̀ⲧⲟⲧⲟⲩ ϣ ⲡⲉ ⲡⲉⲧⲉⲛϩ̀ⲙⲟⲧ ⲛⲓⲕⲉⲣⲉϥⲉⲣⲛⲟⲃⲓ ϩⲱⲟⲩ ⲥⲉⲉⲣⲇⲁⲛⲓⲍⲓⲛ ⲛ̀ⲛⲓⲣⲉϥⲉⲣⲛⲟⲃⲓ ϩⲓⲛⲁ ⲛ̀ⲧⲟⲩϭⲓ ⲛ̀ⲧⲟⲧⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ⲧⲟⲩϣⲉⲃⲓⲱ.
34 وَإِنْ أَقْرَضْتُمُ الَّذِينَ تَرْجُونَ أَنْ تَسْتَرِدُّوا مِنْهُمْ، فَمَا هُوَ فَضْلُكُمْ؟ فَإِنَّ الْخُطَاةَ أَيْضًا يُقْرِضُونَ الْخُطَاةَ لِكَيْ يَأْخُذُوا مِنْهُمُ الْعِوَضَ.